FN Clarivate Analytics Web of Science
VR 1.0
PT J
AU Johannesen, E
   Jorgensen, LL
   Fossheim, M
   Primicerio, R
   Greenacre, M
   Ljubin, PA
   Dolgov, AV
   Ingvaldsen, RB
   Anisimova, NA
   Manushin, IE
AF Johannesen, Edda
   Jorgensen, Lis Lindal
   Fossheim, Maria
   Primicerio, Raul
   Greenacre, Michael
   Ljubin, Pavel A.
   Dolgov, Andrey V.
   Ingvaldsen, Randi B.
   Anisimova, Natalya A.
   Manushin, Igor E.
TI Large-scale patterns in community structure of benthos and fish in the
   Barents Sea
SO POLAR BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE Community data; Multivariate analysis; Trawl survey; Ecosystem survey;
   Benthic fauna
ID DEMERSAL ASSEMBLAGES; MARINE; DIVERSITY; ATLANTIC; FAUNA
AB Biogeographical patterns have an ecological basis, but few empirical studies possess the necessary scale and resolution relevant for investigation. The Barents Sea shelf provides an ideal study area, as it is a transition area between Atlantic and Arctic regions, and is sampled by a comprehensive survey of all major functional groups. We studied spatial variation in species composition of demersal fish and benthos to elucidate how fish and benthos communities co-varied in relation to environmental variables. We applied co-correspondence analysis on presence-absence data of 64 fishes and 302 benthos taxa from 329 bottom trawl hauls taken at the Barents Sea ecosystem survey in August-September 2011. We found highly significant similarities in the spatial pattern of distribution of benthos and fishes, despite their differences in motility and other ecological traits. The first common ordination axis separated boreal species in the south-west (Atlantic temperate water) from Arctic species in the north-east (Arctic cold water, ice-covered in winter). The second common axis separated shallow bank species from species found in deep basins and trenches. Our results show that fish and benthos communities had a similar relationship to the environmental gradients at the scale of hundreds to thousands of kilometres. We further discussed how fish-benthos interactions vary between sub-regions in the Barents Sea based on species traits and a food web topology for the Barents Sea. This study forms a basis for further investigations on links between fish and benthos communities in the Barents Sea.
RI Manushin, IGOR/T-3227-2018
OI Manushin, IGOR/0000-0002-9246-195X
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 0722-4060
EI 1432-2056
PD FEB
PY 2017
VL 40
IS 2
BP 237
EP 246
DI 10.1007/s00300-016-1946-6
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000393761500001
ER

PT J
AU Soons, MB
   de Groot, GA
   Ramirez, MTC
   Fraaije, RGA
   Verhoeven, JTA
   de Jager, M
AF Soons, Merel B.
   de Groot, G. Arjen
   Cuesta Ramirez, M. Teresa
   Fraaije, Rob G. A.
   Verhoeven, Jos T. A.
   de Jager, Monique
TI Directed dispersal by an abiotic vector: wetland plants disperse their
   seeds selectively to suitable sites along the hydrological gradient via
   water
SO FUNCTIONAL ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE anemochory; biodiversity; evolutionary adaptations; hydrochory;
   hydrological niche; plant functional traits; riparian zones; seed
   dispersal; water dispersal; wind dispersal
ID LONG-DISTANCE DISPERSAL; LIFE-HISTORY TRAITS; HABITAT FRAGMENTATION;
   VEGETATION PATTERNS; MOVEMENT ECOLOGY; WIND DISPERSAL; COMMUNITIES;
   FOREST; COLONIZATION; DETERMINANTS
AB 1. Plant species around the world invest in seed dispersal by producing large numbers of seeds, with a wide range of morphological adaptations that facilitate dispersal. Not all dispersed seeds reach suitable sites, however, and plants can significantly improve their fitness by increasing the proportion of seeds arriving at suitable sites for germination and establishment. Disproportionate dispersal to suitable sites is known as 'directed dispersal'. Yet, mechanisms of directed dispersal are only known for a limited number of animal-dispersed plant species.
   2. We tested the hypothesis that directed dispersal can also be driven by abiotic vectors, such as water or wind. We used a tiered approach, combining analyses of experimental, field and literature data on wetland plant species and evaluating the potential for evolution of directed dispersal with a spatially explicit individual-based model.
   3. The data collected demonstrate that wetland plants produce seeds with adaptations to promote transportation and deposition by water towards microsites along the hydrological gradient where they germinate and establish best. Aquatic species produce seeds that sink and are transported by water as bed load towards inundated sites. In contrast, shoreline species produce seeds that float for very long periods of time so that they are eventually entrapped by shoreline vegetation or deposited at the waterline. Our model simulations confirm that the patterns we observed in nature can evolve under natural selection through adaptations in seed buoyancy.
   4. For wind dispersal, the situation is more complex. Wind does not provide directed dispersal in the strictest sense but, rather, simply appears to be the best available dispersal vector for more terrestrial wetland plant species to reach drier areas in a wet environment.
   5. Synthesis. We show that directed dispersal towards specific, suitable microsites is not exclusive to animal-dispersed plant species, but may be far more common in plants - also in species dispersed by abiotic vectors, in particular water. As water and wind are very common dispersal vectors throughout the plant kingdom, directed dispersal (and not just dispersal distance) seems to be of general importance for the ecology of plants.
RI Soons, Merel/C-6216-2009
OI de Jager, Monique/0000-0001-5271-6957; Soons, Merel/0000-0002-6130-6359
TC 8
Z9 9
SN 0269-8463
EI 1365-2435
PD FEB
PY 2017
VL 31
IS 2
BP 499
EP 508
DI 10.1111/1365-2435.12771
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000394374100024
ER

PT J
AU VanBuren, CS
   Evans, DC
AF VanBuren, Collin S.
   Evans, David C.
TI Evolution and function of anterior cervical vertebral fusion in
   tetrapods
SO BIOLOGICAL REVIEWS
DT Article
DE cervical vertebra; fossoriality; comparative anatomy; convergent
   evolution; osteology; neck; functional morphology; marine; vertebral
   column; palaeoecology; syncervical
ID WHALE MEGAPTERA-NOVAEANGLIAE; MOLECULAR PHYLOGENY; PEDETES-CAPENSIS;
   DINOSAURS; ANATOMY; MORPHOLOGY; REPTILIA; RODENTIA; MAMMALS;
   SPECIALIZATION
AB The evolution of vertebral fusion is a poorly understood phenomenon that results in the loss of mobility between sequential vertebrae. Non-pathological fusion of the anterior cervical vertebrae has evolved independently in numerous extant and extinct mammals and reptiles, suggesting that the formation of a 'syncervical' is an adaptation that arose to confer biomechanical advantage(s) in these lineages. We review syncervical anatomy and evolution in a broad phylogenetic context for the first time and provide a comprehensive summary of proposed adaptive hypotheses. The syncervical generally consists of two vertebrae (e.g. hornbills, porcupines, dolphins) but can include fusion of seven cervical vertebrae in some cetaceans. Based on the ecologies of taxa with this trait, cervical fusion most often occurs in fossorial and pelagic taxa. In fossorial taxa, the syncervical likely increases the out-lever force during head-lift digging. In cetaceans and ricochetal rodents, the syncervical may stabilize the head and neck during locomotion, although considerable variation exists in its composition without apparent variability in locomotion. Alternatively, the highly reduced cervical vertebral centra may require fusion to prevent mechanical failure of the vertebrae. In birds, the syncervical of hornbills may have evolved in response to their unique casque-butting behaviour, or due to increased head mass. The general correlation between ecological traits and the presence of a syncervical in extant taxa allows more accurate interpretation of extinct animals that also exhibit this unique trait. For example, syncervicals evolved independently in several groups of marine reptiles and may have functioned to stabilize the head at the craniocervical joint during pelagic locomotion, as in cetaceans. Overall, the origin and function of fused cervical vertebrae is poorly understood, emphasizing the need for future comparative biomechanical studies interpreted in an evolutionary context.
TC 7
Z9 7
SN 1464-7931
EI 1469-185X
PD FEB
PY 2017
VL 92
IS 1
BP 608
EP 626
DI 10.1111/brv.12245
SC Life Sciences & Biomedicine - Other Topics
UT WOS:000391937700031
PM 26766070
ER

PT J
AU Montalto, V
   Martinez, M
   Rinaldi, A
   Sara, G
   Mirto, S
AF Montalto, Valeria
   Martinez, Marco
   Rinaldi, Alessandro
   Sara, Gianluca
   Mirto, Sinione
TI The effect of the quality of diet on the functional response of Mytilus
   galloprovincialis (Lamarck, 1819): Implications for integrated
   multitrophic aquaculture (IMTA) and marine spatial planning
SO AQUACULTURE
DT Article
DE Mussels; Feeding; Dynamic Energy Budget model; Growth performances
ID MULTI-TROPHIC AQUACULTURE; ENERGY BUDGET; POSIDONIA-OCEANICA; FOOD
   AVAILABILITY; ABRA-OVATA; BIVALVES; INGESTION; MUSSELS; EDULIS; GROWTH
AB The integrated multi-trophic aquaculture (i.e., IMTA) is a practice combining organisms with different trophic levels with the final purpose of transforming the continuous waste of food by targeting species into nutrient input for other non-target species. This practice very often involves filter feeders, such as bivalves, by the use of which bioenergetics budgets are strongly influenced by the quality and quantity of different foods. However, to date, scant information is available, to really understand the rebounds of food availability on the growth performances of these harvested biomasses in the natural environment. By choosing the mussel Mytilus galloprovincialis as a model, this study aims to (1) characterize the functional response of the species to define all parameters related to food intake strategies and (2) to investigate how responses change as a function of varying food sources. Laboratory procedures have been designed to evaluate the clearance rates (CR) and assimilation efficiencies (AE) of M. galloprovincialis with varying food concentrations, while different diets (i.e., seagrass, phytoplankton, and pellets) have been provided to investigate how differently they reach saturation. Results show that in the presence of phytoplankton and seagrass as food sources, the feeding strategies of M. galloprovincialis follow a II-type Holling's curve, while it shows a I-type Holling's curve when pellet food is provided. Investigating the behavioural components of functional responses may improve our ability to predict where to place shellfish cultures, as it may be useful in the context of IMTA management and in addressing siting studies.
   Statement of relevance: Our paper focuses on a question central to understanding and predicting the likely impacts of one among the most important human economic activity like the aquaculture in coastal habitats. The main question deals with the possibility to combine experimental procedures with the new mechanistic functional trait based bioenergetic models in order to effectively predict life history traits of cultivated species. (C) 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 0044-8486
EI 1873-5622
PD FEB 1
PY 2017
VL 468
BP 371
EP 377
DI 10.1016/j.aquaculture.2016.10.030
PN 1
SC Fisheries; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000390735200049
ER

PT J
AU Escoriza, D
   Ben Hassine, J
AF Escoriza, Daniel
   Ben Hassine, Jihene
TI Diversity of Guilds of Amphibian Larvae in North-Western Africa
SO PLOS ONE
DT Article
ID SPECIES RICHNESS; FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; CLIMATE-CHANGE;
   PHYLOGENETIC-RELATIONSHIPS; AGRICULTURAL LANDSCAPE; TADPOLE COMMUNITIES;
   ECOLOGICAL DATA; REGIONAL-SCALE; HABITAT; PONDS
AB The composition and diversity of biotic assemblages is regulated by a complex interplay of environmental features. We investigated the influence of climate and the aquatic habitat conditions on the larval traits and the structure of amphibian larval guilds in north-western Africa. We classified the species into morphological groups, based on external traits: body shape, size, and the relative positions of the eyes and oral apparatus. We characterized the guild diversity based on species richness and interspecific phylogenetic/functional relationships. The larvae of the urodeles were classified as typical of either the stream or pond type, and the anurans as typical of either the lentic-benthic or lentic-nektonic type. The variations in the body shapes of both urodeles and anurans were associated with the type of aquatic habitat (lentic vs lotic) and the types of predators present. Most of the urodele guilds (98.9%) contained a single species, whereas the anuran guilds were usually more diverse. Both the phylogenetic and functional diversity of the anuran guilds were positively influenced by the size of the aquatic habitat and negatively by aridity. In anurans, the benthic and nektonic morphological types frequently co-occurred, possibly influenced by their opportunistic breeding strategies.
TC 2
Z9 3
SN 1932-6203
PD JAN 26
PY 2017
VL 12
IS 1
AR e0170763
DI 10.1371/journal.pone.0170763
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000396176100059
PM 28125660
ER

PT J
AU Escoriza, D
   Ben Hassine, J
AF Escoriza, Daniel
   Ben Hassine, Jihene
TI Diversity of Guilds of Amphibian Larvae in North-Western Africa
SO PLOS ONE
DT Article
ID SPECIES RICHNESS; FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; CLIMATE-CHANGE;
   PHYLOGENETIC-RELATIONSHIPS; AGRICULTURAL LANDSCAPE; TADPOLE COMMUNITIES;
   ECOLOGICAL DATA; REGIONAL-SCALE; HABITAT; PONDS
AB The composition and diversity of biotic assemblages is regulated by a complex interplay of environmental features. We investigated the influence of climate and the aquatic habitat conditions on the larval traits and the structure of amphibian larval guilds in north-western Africa. We classified the species into morphological groups, based on external traits: body shape, size, and the relative positions of the eyes and oral apparatus. We characterized the guild diversity based on species richness and interspecific phylogenetic/functional relationships. The larvae of the urodeles were classified as typical of either the stream or pond type, and the anurans as typical of either the lentic-benthic or lentic-nektonic type. The variations in the body shapes of both urodeles and anurans were associated with the type of aquatic habitat (lentic vs lotic) and the types of predators present. Most of the urodele guilds (98.9%) contained a single species, whereas the anuran guilds were usually more diverse. Both the phylogenetic and functional diversity of the anuran guilds were positively influenced by the size of the aquatic habitat and negatively by aridity. In anurans, the benthic and nektonic morphological types frequently co-occurred, possibly influenced by their opportunistic breeding strategies.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1932-6203
PD JAN 26
PY 2017
VL 12
IS 1
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000396176100063
ER

PT J
AU Breton, E
   Christaki, U
   Bonato, S
   Didry, M
   Artigas, LF
AF Breton, Elsa
   Christaki, Urania
   Bonato, Simon
   Didry, Morgane
   Artigas, Luis Felipe
TI Functional trait variation and nitrogen use efficiency in temperate
   coastal phytoplankton
SO MARINE ECOLOGY PROGRESS SERIES
DT Article
DE Phytoplankton community; Flow cytometry; Functional traits; Nitrogen use
   efficiency
ID EASTERN ENGLISH-CHANNEL; COMMUNITY ASSEMBLY RULES; RESOURCE USE
   EFFICIENCY; NORTH-SEA; SOUTHERN BIGHT; FLOW-CYTOMETRY;
   PHAEOCYSTIS-POUCHETII; DIVERSITY INDEXES; ORGANIC NITROGEN; GLOBAL OCEAN
AB This study explored the relevance of the use of a trait-based approach to explain seasonal phytoplankton succession and the underlying mechanisms that structure phytoplankton assemblages and promote nitrogen use efficiency (NUE) in the temperate coastal waters of the eastern English Channel (EEC). A 3 yr time series of phytoplankton abundance assessed by flow cytometry was combined with a selection of traits related to resource utilization (light and in organic nutrients), grazing resistance, and maximum growth, mainly sourced from the literature. Our results showed that the identified functional groups (FGs) ranged deterministically along a temporal gradient of light and nutrient availability, according to several fundamental trade-offs. These trade-offs, which reflected different ecological strategies, were distributed along 1 axis of niche differentiation. This favoured different FGs through time, and consequently allowed them to partition those available resources. The observed functional divergence of the phytoplankton community deviated from that of the expected, random one. It showed that as light increased, the phytoplankton community assembly was mainly driven by competition and grazing pressure, which eventually favoured those FGs that were fastest growing and less vulnerable to predation. Structural equation modeling evidenced that a phytoplankton community, functionally dominated by FGs that were relatively large, fast-growing, and well-adapted to higher light, promoted NUE. Together, these results confirmed the potential use of laboratory-measured functional traits to explore environment-trait linkages in phytoplankton. They also showed the possibility of further extending this approach to identify the mechanisms driving phytoplankton community assembly, structure, and related ecosystem processes.
OI Christaki, Urania/0000-0002-2061-5278; Breton, Elsa/0000-0002-9569-5436
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 0171-8630
EI 1616-1599
PD JAN 20
PY 2017
VL 563
BP 35
EP 49
DI 10.3354/meps11974
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology;
   Oceanography
UT WOS:000395424200004
ER

PT J
AU Gervasi, SS
   Stephens, PR
   Hua, J
   Searle, CL
   Xie, GY
   Urbina, J
   Olson, DH
   Bancroft, BA
   Weis, V
   Hammond, JI
   Relyea, RA
   Blaustein, AR
AF Gervasi, Stephanie S.
   Stephens, Patrick R.
   Hua, Jessica
   Searle, Catherine L.
   Xie, Gisselle Yang
   Urbina, Jenny
   Olson, Deanna H.
   Bancroft, Betsy A.
   Weis, Virginia
   Hammond, John I.
   Relyea, Rick A.
   Blaustein, Andrew R.
TI Linking Ecology and Epidemiology to Understand Predictors of Multi-Host
   Responses to an Emerging Pathogen, the Amphibian Chytrid Fungus
SO PLOS ONE
DT Article
ID BATRACHOCHYTRIUM-DENDROBATIDIS; POPULATION DECLINES; LIFE-HISTORY;
   INTERSPECIFIC VARIATION; PHYLOGENETIC SIGNAL; AMERICAN BULLFROG;
   RANA-CATESBEIANA; BOREAL TOADS; SUSCEPTIBILITY; DISEASE
AB Variation in host responses to pathogens can have cascading effects on populations and communities when some individuals or groups of individuals display disproportionate vulnerability to infection or differ in their competence to transmit infection. The fungal pathogen, Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd) has been detected in almost 700 different amphibian species and is implicated in numerous global amphibian population declines. Identifying key hosts in the amphibian-Bd system those who are at greatest risk or who pose the greatest risk for others is challenging due in part to many extrinsic environmental factors driving spatiotemporal Bd distribution and context-dependent host responses to Bd in the wild. One way to improve predictive risk models and generate testable mechanistic hypotheses about vulnerability is to complement what we know about the spatial epidemiology of Bd with data collected through comparative experimental studies. We used standardized pathogen challenges to quantify amphibian survival and infection trajectories across 20 post-metamorphic North American species raised from eggs. We then incorporated trait-based models to investigate the predictive power of phylogenetic history, habitat use, and ecological and life history traits in explaining responses to Bd. True frogs (Ranidae) displayed the lowest infection intensities, whereas toads (Bufonidae) generally displayed the greatest levels of mortality after Bd exposure. Affiliation with ephemeral aquatic habitat and breadth of habitat use were strong predictors of vulnerability to and intensity of infection and several other traits including body size, lifespan, age at sexual maturity, and geographic range also appeared in top models explaining host responses to Bd. Several of the species examined are highly understudied with respect to Bd such that this study represents the first experimental susceptibility data. Combining insights gained from experimental studies with observations of landscape level disease prevalence may help explain current and predict future pathogen dynamics in the Bd system.
TC 9
Z9 9
SN 1932-6203
PD JAN 17
PY 2017
VL 12
IS 1
AR e0167882
DI 10.1371/journal.pone.0167882
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000392372300006
PM 28095428
ER

PT J
AU Porzio, L
   Buia, MC
   Lorenti, M
   De Maio, A
   Arena, C
AF Porzio, Lucia
   Buia, Maria Cristina
   Lorenti, Maurizio
   De Maio, Anna
   Arena, Carmen
TI Physiological responses of a population of Sargassum vulgare
   (Phaeophyceae) to high pCO(2)/low pH: implications for its long-term
   distribution
SO SCIENCE OF THE TOTAL ENVIRONMENT
DT Article
DE Adaptive response; Brown algae; Ecophysiology; Ocean acidification;
   Poly(ADP-ribosylation); Stress response
ID OCEAN ACIDIFICATION; CHLOROPHYLL-FLUORESCENCE; POLY(ADP-RIBOSE)
   POLYMERASE; PHOTOSYNTHETIC ACTIVITY; MARINE MACROALGAE; OXIDATIVE
   STRESS; CLIMATE-CHANGE; ELEVATED CO2; GROWTH; FUCALES
AB Ocean Acidification (OA) is likely to affect macroalgal diversity in the future with species-specific responses shaping macroalgal communities. In this framework, it is important to focus research on the photosynthetic response of habitat-forming species which have an important structural and functional role in coastal ecosystems. Most of the studies on the impacts of OA involve short-term laboratory or micro/mesocosm experiments. It is more challenging to assess the adaptive responses of macroalgal community to decreasing ocean pH over long-term periods, as they represent the basis of trophic dynamics in marine environments. This work aims to study the physiological traits of a population of Sargassum vulgare that lives naturally in the high pCO(2) vents system in Ischia (Italy), in order to predict the species behaviour in a possible OA future scenario. With this purpose, the photosynthetic performance of S. vulgare was studied in a wild, natural population living at low pH (6.7) as well as in a population transplanted from native (6.7) to ambient pH (8.1) for three weeks. The main results show that the photochemical activity and Rubisco expression decreased by 30% after transplanting, whereas the non-photochemical dissipation mechanisms and the photosynthetic pigment content increased by 50% and 40% respectively, in order to compensate for the decrease in photochemical efficiency at low pH. Our data indicated a stress condition for the S. vulgare population induced by pH variation, and therefore a reduced acclimation capability at different pH conditions. The decline of the PSH maximum quantum yield (F-v/F-m) and the increase of PARP enzyme activity in transplanted thalli further supported this hypothesis. The absence of the species at ambient pH conditions close to the vent system, as well as the differences in physiological traits, suggest a local adaptation of S. vulgare at pH 6.7, through optimization of photosynthetic performance. (C) 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
RI Lorenti, Maurizio/L-8219-2014
OI Lorenti, Maurizio/0000-0002-9729-3668
TC 7
Z9 7
SN 0048-9697
EI 1879-1026
PD JAN 15
PY 2017
VL 576
BP 917
EP 925
DI 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.10.096
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000390964700087
PM 27865121
ER

PT J
AU Hiraiwa, MK
   Ushimaru, A
AF Hiraiwa, Masayoshi K.
   Ushimaru, Atushi
TI Low functional diversity promotes niche changes in natural island
   pollinator communities
SO PROCEEDINGS OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY B-BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES
DT Article
DE niche position; niche breadth; long-tongued pollinator; sand dune;
   natural experiment
ID LAND-USE INTENSIFICATION; ECOSYSTEM PROCESSES; BUMBLE-BEES; REPRODUCTIVE
   SUCCESS; FLOWER VISITORS; CLIMATE-CHANGE; FLORAL TRAITS; FRUIT-SET;
   PATTERNS; BIODIVERSITY
AB Functional diversity loss among pollinators has rapidly progressed across the globe and is expected to influence plant-pollinator interactions in natural communities. Although recent findings suggest that the disappearance of a certain pollinator functional group may cause niche expansions and/or shifts in other groups, no study has examined this prediction in natural communities with high plant and pollinator diversities. By comparing coastal pollination networks on continental and oceanic islands, we examined how community-level flower visit patterns are influenced by the relative biomass of long-tongued pollinators (RBLP). We found that RBLP significantly correlated with pollinator functional diversity and was lower in oceanic than in continental islands. Pollinator niches shifted with decreasing RBLP, such that diverse species with various proboscis lengths, especially short-tongued species, increasingly visited long-tubed flowers. However, we found no conspicuous negative impacts of low RBLP and the consequent niche shifts on pollinator visit frequencies to flowers in oceanic island communities. Notably, fruit set significantly decreased as RBLP decreased in a study plant species. These results suggest that niche shifts by other functional groups can generally compensate for a decline in long-tongued pollinators in natural communities, but there may be negative impacts on plant reproduction.
OI Ushimaru, Atushi/0000-0002-2051-1233
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 0962-8452
EI 1471-2954
PD JAN 11
PY 2017
VL 284
IS 1846
AR 20162218
DI 10.1098/rspb.2016.2218
SC Life Sciences & Biomedicine - Other Topics; Environmental Sciences &
   Ecology; Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000393400500007
PM 28077773
ER

PT S
AU Martinez, AS
   Byrne, M
   Coleman, RA
AF Martinez, Aline S.
   Byrne, Maria
   Coleman, Ross A.
BE Hawkins, SJ
   Evans, AJ
   Dale, AC
   Firth, LB
   Hughes, DJ
   Smith, IP
TI FILLING IN THE GRAZING PUZZLE: A SYNTHESIS OF HERBIVORY IN STARFISH
SO OCEANOGRAPHY AND MARINE BIOLOGY: AN ANNUAL REVIEW, VOL 55
SE Oceanography and Marine Biology
DT Article; Book Chapter
ID OF-THORNS STARFISH; OREASTER-RETICULATUS ECHINODERMATA;
   CALLINECTES-SAPIDUS RATHBUN; STICHASTER-AUSTRALIS VERRILL; JUVENILE
   ACANTHASTER-PLANCI; PATIRIELLA-EXIGUA LAMARCK; FUNCTIONAL-GROUP
   APPROACH; MARINE CHEMICAL ECOLOGY; GREAT-BARRIER-REEF; SAND PATCH
   HABITAT
AB Herbivory is an important ecological process controlling community structure and function in almost all ecosystems. The effects of herbivores on algal assemblages depend primarily on consumer and algal traits, but the strength of this interaction is contingent on physical and biological processes. Marine herbivory is particularly intense, where grazers can remove around 70% of primary production. Present understanding of marine herbivory is largely based on well-studied groups including herbivorous fishes, gastropods, crustaceans and sea urchins. Herbivory in other marine taxa is poorly understood, but nonetheless important. For instance, grazing by starfish has the potential to strongly affect algal assemblages, Most starfish feed by extruding their stomach and digesting their food externally. This feeding mechanism is distinctive and complex, and evolutionarily advantageous as it allows individuals to explore many different food sources. Variation in the feeding habits of herbivorous starfish is intriguing because some species are very specialized whereas others are more generalist, and the reasons for those variations are not well understood, Some herbivorous starfish are obligate herbivores while others vary from herbivory to carnivory between life stages or between populations within the same species. The question that then arises is how well we are able to predict grazing pressure from complex feeding habits on henthic systems? This review provides a synthesis of herbivory in starfish showing that: the majority of species forage on microalgae and soft tissue macroalgae; fidelity to an algal diet appears to be related to the size of individuals; and, feeding habits are likely to change with variation in food availability. Directions for future studies on the biology and ecology of herbivorous starfish are suggested to better understand variation in species feeding behaviour, Elucidating the mechanisms that contribute to variation in the behaviour of herbivorous starfish is crucial to predict the effects that these species exert on the structure of marine henthic communities, The influence of omnivorous species also warrants more detailed study, Such investigations are important in the context of climate change, given the potential for species invasions associated with range expansions.
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 0078-3218
BN 978-1-138-19786-2
PY 2017
VL 55
BP 1
EP 34
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000438963000003
ER

PT J
AU Villa, P
   Pinardi, M
   Toth, VR
   Hunter, PD
   Bolpagni, R
   Bresciani, M
AF Villa, Paolo
   Pinardi, Monica
   Toth, Viktor R.
   Hunter, Peter D.
   Bolpagni, Rossano
   Bresciani, Mariano
TI Remote sensing of macrophyte morphological traits: Implications for the
   management of shallow lakes
SO JOURNAL OF LIMNOLOGY
DT Article
DE Biomonitoring; fractional cover; LAI; biomass; invasive species;
   hyperspectral data; APEX
ID WATER PROTECTION SYSTEM; HYPERSPECTRAL VEGETATION INDEXES; AQUATIC
   VEGETATION; REFLECTANCE SPECTRA; ECOSYSTEM SERVICES; REED VEGETATION;
   CHLOROPHYLL; BALATON; SEDIMENT; QUALITY
AB Macrophytes are important elements of freshwater ecosystems, fulfilling a pivotal role in biogeochemical cycles. The synoptic capabilities provided by remote sensing make it a powerful tool for monitoring aquatic vegetation characteristics and the functional status of shallow lake systems in which they occur. The latest generation of airborne and spaceborne imaging sensors can be effectively exploited for mapping morphologically and physiologically relevant vegetation features based on their canopy spectral response. The objectives of this study were to calibrate semi-empirical models for mapping macrophyte morphological traits (i.e., fractional cover, leaf area index and above-water biomass) from hyperspectral data, and to investigate the capabilities of remote sensing in supporting macrophyte monitoring and management. We calibrated spectral models using in situ reflectance and morphological trait measures and applied them to airborne hyperspectral imaging data, acquired over two shallow European water bodies (Lake Hidvegi, in Hungary, and Mantua lakes system, in Italy) in two key phenological phases. Maps of morphological traits were produced covering a broad range of aquatic plant types (submerged, floating, and emergent), common to temperate and continental regions, with an error level of 5.4% for fractional cover, 0.10 m(2) m(-2) for leaf area index, and 0.06 kg m(-2) for above-water biomass. Based on these maps, we discuss how remote sensing could support monitoring strategies and shallow lake management with reference to our two case studies: i.e., by providing insight into spatial and species-wise variability, by assessing nutrient uptake by aquatic plants, and by identifying hotspot areas where invasive species could become a threat to ecosystem functioning and service provision.
TC 5
Z9 5
SN 1129-5767
EI 1723-8633
PY 2017
VL 76
SU 1
BP 109
EP 126
DI 10.4081/jlimnol.2017.1629
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000429105600012
ER

PT J
AU Reyes-Ramirez, H
   Florido, R
   Alvarez-Pliego, N
   Sanchez, AJ
   Salcedo, MA
AF Reyes-Ramirez, Henrry
   Florido, Rosa
   Alvarez-Pliego, Nicolas
   Sanchez, Alberto J.
   Angel Salcedo, Miguel
TI Feeding Habits of Cathorops aguadulce (Siluriformes: Ariidae) in an
   Estuarine System in the Southern Gulf of Mexico
SO HIDROBIOLOGICA
DT Article
DE Coastal lagoon; diet; ontogenic shift; temporal variation
ID SHRIMP PENAEUS-AZTECUS; DUORARUM BURKENROAD; POPULATION-DYNAMICS; FISH
   ASSEMBLAGE; PREDATION; ECOLOGY; BRAZIL; DIET; SEA; ICHTHYOFAUNA
AB Background. The distribution and diet of fish, as well as the specific composition of their prey, have been affected by the magnification of the spatial variations in salinity due to hydraulic infrastructure and climate change. Cathorops aguadulce was selected based on previous records of its diet and its current dominance in the estuarine systems in the southern Gulf of Mexico. Goals. The feeding habits were evaluated in relation to the variation of size composition, day-night, and seasonality in a coastal lagoon in the southern Gulf of Mexico. Methods. Two hundred ten digestive tracts were analyzed in juveniles and adults captured in a sampling that included the day-night and seasonal variation in three sampling sites located in a salinity gradient. The size composition was correlated (Spearman coefficient) with the spatial and temporal variation of salinity and temperature. The temporal and spatial variations of the Repletion (IR) and Relative Importance (IIR) indexes were analyzed using Kruskal-Wallis test and hierarchical clustering. Results. The size composition was independent of salinity variation and IR values (Kruskal-Wallis; p = 0.649). Yet diet intensity in the dry season was significantly greater than in the transition and rainy seasons (Kruskal-Wallis; p = 0.00001). Among the 11 food items defined, animal detritus and malacostracans, mainly tanaids, were the dominant feeding categories in the frequency of occurrence and according to the IIR. However, detritus predominated in juveniles, while tanaids were the preponderant item in the adults. Conclusions. Even though laguna Mecoacan recorded an ample salinity variation, C. aguadulce recorded a significant temporal variation in intensity of diet; the ontogenic shift of its diet was more relevant than the effects of the environmental variation of its feeding habits. This conclusion opens the possibility of testing whether the ontogenetic variation of their functional morphological traits is associated with the acquisition of food or movement.
RI Alvarez-Pliego, Nicolas/D-6335-2014
OI Alvarez-Pliego, Nicolas/0000-0001-5824-8410; Salcedo, Miguel
   Angel/0000-0003-4117-0770
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0188-8897
PY 2017
VL 27
IS 2
BP 163
EP 173
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000418486800003
ER

PT J
AU Berger, C
   Fureder, L
AF Berger, Christian
   Fureder, Leopold
TI Annelid symbiont assemblage and European stone crayfish - a
   deterministic relationship with implications for conservation management
SO KNOWLEDGE AND MANAGEMENT OF AQUATIC ECOSYSTEMS
DT Article
DE Austropotamobius torrentium; Branchiobdella; Hystricosoma chappuisi;
   biogeography; aquatic microcosm
ID NATURAL-HISTORY MUSEUM; BRANCHIOBDELLIDA ANNELIDA;
   AUSTROPOTAMOBIUS-TORRENTIUM; CLEANING SYMBIOSIS; 1ST RECORD; CLITELLATA;
   MUTUALISM; HOST; OLIGOCHAETA; POPULATION
AB The protected European stone crayfish, Austropotamobius torrentium, is a host to epibionts inhabiting its exoskeleton. Despite evidence of the close association of these epibionts to the crayfish and the beneficial services provided for the crayfish, the main factors influencing their occurrence, distribution and abundance are still poorly understood. In order to investigate the stone crayfish epibiont community, the ecological requirements of individual species, and aspects of the host-epibiont relationship we collected data at several crayfish populations in Austria, Switzerland and Germany. At each location, we recorded the epibiont position on the crayfish host along with a number of biotic and abiotic parameters. Apart from recording the Branchiobdella species B. parasita, B. hexadonta, B. pentadonta and B. balcanica, we detected for the first time the polychaete Hystricosoma chappuisi in the European Alps. Species-specific biogeographical and habitat factors such as river catchment borders, crayfish length, water temperature and nutrients concentration were identified to be important for the occurrence and abundance of epibionts. Branchiobdella species were strongly linked to certain host body areas, providing evidence for the existence of different functional traits within the annelid assemblage. With this study we demonstrate that the crayfish-epibionts relationship includes structural and functional complexities that can be important for defining management units in future conservation policies. Due to benefits for the mutualistic relationship, restocking and reintroduction actions are likely to be more successful, if ecological requirements of both the host and the epibiont species are considered.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1961-9502
PY 2017
IS 418
AR 50
DI 10.1051/kmae/2017039
SC Fisheries; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000414595600001
ER

PT J
AU Gimenez, BCG
   Higuti, J
AF Gimenez, Barbara C. G.
   Higuti, Janet
TI Land use effects on the functional structure of aquatic insect
   communities in Neotropical streams
SO INLAND WATERS
DT Article
DE Agriculture; Chironomidae; drift; EPT; lotic environment; urbanization
ID MORPHOLOGICAL DIVERSITY; FISH ASSEMBLAGES; ENVIRONMENTAL-FACTORS; BEETLE
   ASSEMBLAGES; HEADWATER STREAMS; SPECIES RICHNESS; TRAIT DIVERSITY;
   MULTIPLE TRAITS; BRAZIL; DISTURBANCE
AB Land use and occupation by human populations can cause many environmental changes in streams, which affect not only the number and abundance of species but also the biological characteristics or functional traits of the individuals. Here we investigated the influence of different land uses (agriculture and urbanization) on taxonomic and functional diversity of aquatic insects in drift samples from Neotropical streams. To this end, we used 2 diversity metrics: the Shannon-Wiener diversity index (H') to quantify taxonomic diversity and Rao's quadratic entropy index (Q) to measure functional diversity. In addition, we analyzed the importance of environmental variables on functional traits composition. The high heterogeneity of habitats in rural streams contributed to the occurrence of sensitive taxa (i.e., specialist taxa), which mostly do not share the same categories of functional traits, providing higher functional diversity in these streams. Conversely, the impacts resulting from urbanization processes changed the abiotic variables and led to habitat simplification, favoring the dominance of tolerant (generalist) taxa, which share more traits, thus reducing the taxonomic and functional diversity in these sites. Assessing the functional diversity of aquatic insects under the influence of different land uses is of utmost importance to better understand the functioning of aquatic communities impacted by land use change.
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 2044-2041
EI 2044-205X
PY 2017
VL 7
IS 3
BP 305
EP 313
DI 10.1080/20442041.2017.1329910
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000412646100008
ER

PT J
AU Henriques, DSG
   Rigal, F
   Borges, PAV
   Ah-Peng, C
   Gabriel, R
AF Henriques, Dobora S. G.
   Rigal, Francois
   Borges, Paulo A. V.
   Ah-Peng, Claudine
   Gabriel, Rosalina
TI Functional diversity and composition of bryophyte water-related traits
   in Azorean native vegetation
SO PLANT ECOLOGY & DIVERSITY
DT Article
DE elevation gradient; environmental filtering; liverworts; mosses;
   Terceira Island
ID NULL MODEL ANALYSIS; BETA DIVERSITY; CLIMATE-CHANGE; COMMUNITY;
   GRADIENTS; RICHNESS; PATTERNS; ISLAND; BIODIVERSITY; ADAPTATION
AB Background: Functional trait-based approaches link species diversity patterns to ecosystem functioning. In the context of global change, understanding these links is vital for developing holistic biodiversity management strategies. Bryophytes, important ecosystem components owing to their biogeochemical functions, have not been the focus of many functional studies.
   Aims: This is the first assessment of bryophyte functional diversity in the Azores archipelago, aiming to uncover multivariate trait richness and composition patterns along the elevational gradient on Terceira Island.
   Methods: Based on five water acquisition and retention traits of leafy liverworts and mosses, we calculated functional diversity metrics within and among six bryophyte communities sampled along a 1021-m elevational transect.
   Results: Trait composition differed significantly between coastal and mountain communities. Mosses presented inrolled leaves and ornamented leaf cells at low elevation but not at high elevation. These patterns were associated with an uphill shift from drier and warmer conditions to a moister and cooler environment.
   Conclusions: Future climatic changes might affect bryophyte functional diversity patterns in Terceira Island, particularly for mosses. These results can be directly compared with those obtained for other archipelagos where the same protocol has been applied, allowing a joint assessment of insular vegetation functional diversity patterns.
OI Borges, Paulo/0000-0002-8448-7623
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1755-0874
EI 1755-1668
PY 2017
VL 10
IS 2-3
BP 127
EP 137
DI 10.1080/17550874.2017.1315839
SC Plant Sciences
UT WOS:000413593900006
ER

PT J
AU Zhang, CL
   Chen, Y
   Ren, YP
   Wan, R
AF Zhang, Chongliang
   Chen, Yong
   Ren, Yiping
   Wan, Rong
TI Evaluating the sensitivity of ecological indicators with a perspective
   of temporal scales
SO MARINE AND FRESHWATER RESEARCH
DT Article
DE detectability; fishery management; responsiveness; size-spectrum model;
   trophic interaction
ID SEA FISH COMMUNITY; ECOSYSTEM-BASED MANAGEMENT; MARINE CAPTURE
   FISHERIES; SIZE-SPECTRUM MODEL; TRADE-OFFS; FRAMEWORK; OBJECTIVES;
   ABUNDANCE; IMPACTS; SUPPORT
AB This simulation study tests the sensitivity of 12 candidate ecological indicators (EIs) that characterise fish abundance, body size and trophodynamics with respect to temporal scales. Size-spectrum models that explicitly account for trophic interactions are used to simulate community dynamics under different levels of fishing pressure, including a specific model of the fish community in Haizhou Bay, China, and trait-based models of generalised fishery systems. The sensitivity of EIs is characterised by (1) responsiveness, which refers to the dynamics of EI values with respect to the magnitude of changes in fishing effort, and (2) detectability, which measures the relative changes of EI with respect to reference baselines. The response of EIs is substantially non-linear over time. Most EIs are responsive to the reduction of fishing effort and have low detectability under high fishing pressure. Both characteristics of sensitivity tend to increase in the early years and level off in 2 decades, suggesting transient behaviours in EI dynamics. The results suggested the essential non-linear dynamics of EIs resulting from underlying trophic interactions and the potential misinterpretation of the temporal EIs dynamics. We highlight the necessity of considering temporal scales and fishing characteristics in applying EIs in fishery management.
OI Zhang, Chongliang/0000-0002-4753-9973
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1323-1650
EI 1448-6059
PY 2017
VL 68
IS 9
BP 1664
EP 1676
DI 10.1071/MF16084
SC Fisheries; Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000408576800008
ER

PT J
AU Mandavi, P
   Isermann, M
   Bergmeier, E
AF Mandavi, Parastoo
   Isermann, Maike
   Bergmeier, Erwin
TI Sand habitats across biogeographical regions at species, community and
   functional level
SO PHYTOCOENOLOGIA
DT Article
DE Atlantic region; azonality; beta diversity; coastal vegetation;
   Irano-Turanian region; functional trait; Mediterranean region; saline
   habitat; salt marsh; sand dune; syntaxa
ID PLANT-COMMUNITIES; SALT MARSHES; COASTAL DUNES; VEGETATION; ECOSYSTEMS;
   ZONATION; CLASSIFICATION; MORPHOLOGY; PHYLOGENY; DIVERSITY
AB Questions: To what extent does habitat similarity across different climatic regions support vegetation similarity at taxonomic, syntaxonomic and functional levels? Do different sand habitats share similarity patterns across regions? To what extent are sand habitats azonal with respect to taxonomic, syntaxonomic and functional similarity? What are the syntaxonomic and functional analogues? Study area: Coastal areas of N Germany, NE Greece, N Iran, and the Namak Lake shore in Central Iran. Methods: In four biogeographic regions (Atlantic, Mediterranean, Hyrcanian, Irano-Turanian) we collected 450 releves representing four habitat types: drift lines, mobile dunes, stabilized dunes, and salt marshes. Plant communities were classified using TWINSPAN and assigned to syntaxa. High-rank syntaxa of each habitat were compared across four regions. Beta diversity was used to compare the species similarity between regions and habitats. We further compared trait-based functional groups across regions and habitats at the syntaxonomic level of class. Results: The floristic composition of sand habitats depended highly on the biogeographic region. At plant species and genus level, very low similarity was found between sand habitats of the same kind across regions as well as across habitats within a region. However, sand habitats of the same kind in different regions showed considerable functional similarity. Vegetation under particularly high stress, such as of salt marshes and drift lines, showed more syntaxonomic and functional similarities between regions than that of mobile and stabilized dunes, which was more determined by the regional species pool. Conclusions: The more stress-prone a habitat, the more is its vegetation habitat related and the less dependent on the biogeographic region. All studied habitats are azonal but nuances are recognizable, and the concept of azonality is more generally applicable using functional traits as parameter. We further suggest using functional group proportions as a complementary tool to diagnostic species when comparing biogeographically distant, vicariant plant communities.
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0340-269X
PY 2017
VL 47
IS 2
BP 139
EP 165
DI 10.1127/phyto/2017/0127
SC Plant Sciences; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000407305600003
ER

PT J
AU Castillo, JM
   Leira-Doce, P
   Figueroa, E
AF Castillo, Jesus M.
   Leira-Doce, Pablo
   Figueroa, Enrique
TI Biomass and clonal architecture of the cordgrass Spartina patens
   (Poaceae) as an invasive species in two contrasted coastal habitats on
   the Atlantic coast of the Iberian Peninsula
SO PLANT ECOLOGY AND EVOLUTION
DT Article
DE Asperillo sea-cliff; exotic species; Guadiana river; invasive species;
   intratussock shoot density; Spartina versicolor
ID SALT-MARSH SUCCESSION; BELOW-GROUND BIOMASS; ECOLOGICAL AMPLITUDE;
   ANGLICA POACEAE; GENETIC-BASIS; DNA MARKERS; MARITIMA; PLANT;
   ALTERNIFLORA; DENSIFLORA
AB Background and aims - The spread of invasive exotic species is one of the most important threats for salt marshes and cordgrasses (genus Spartina) are among the most invasive halophytes. Recent analyses have revealed low levels of genetic diversity within the European cordgrass Spartina patens, clarifying that it was introduced from a narrow genetic pool of plants from North America. As biomass and intratussock structure are key functional traits in the ecological behaviour of cordgrasses, our aim was to document this here for the first time in Spartina patens in Europe.
   Methods - This work analyses above- and below-ground biomass and intratussock structure for two Spartina patens populations in Southern Spain in the two main invaded habitats in Europe, coastal dunes and brackish marshes.
   Key results - Spartina patens showed higher above-ground biomass and higher above: below-ground biomass ratio in the brackish marsh than on the coastal dunes due to higher live shoot densities with similar shoot heights. Sexual reproduction of Spartina patens was very limited in both studied populations since only a few inflorescences were recorded in just one tussock in the marsh.
   Conclusions - Our results for introduced Spartina patens in Spain are compared with those recorded for cohabiting cordgrasses, the native European Spartina maritima and the invasive Spartina densiflora, as well as with Spartina patens in North American marshes. Spartina patens appears as a species with moderate invasive potential in European coastal marshes and dunes since it shows very low sexual reproduction but a high phenotypic plasticity, which would support its invasive capacity. Eradication efforts are most cost effective in the early stage of infestation, when population sizes are still relatively small, and should thus be a focus of the control efforts of S. patens in the Southwest Iberian Peninsula as well as in other European areas, where this cordgrass is still not very abundant.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 2032-3913
EI 2032-3921
PY 2017
VL 150
IS 2
BP 129
EP 138
DI 10.5091/plecevo.2017.1290
SC Plant Sciences
UT WOS:000405359100002
ER

PT J
AU Cabana, D
   Nicolaidou, A
   Sigala, K
   Reizopoulou, S
AF Cabana, D.
   Nicolaidou, A.
   Sigala, K.
   Reizopoulou, S.
TI Multi-scale functional and taxonomic beta-diversity of the
   macroinvertebrate communities in a Mediterranean coastal lagoon
SO MEDITERRANEAN MARINE SCIENCE
DT Article
DE Beta diversity; Benthic macroinvertebrates; Functional diversity;
   Biological trait analysis; Habitats; Seasons; Coastal lagoon
ID BENTHIC MACROINVERTEBRATES; SALINITY GRADIENT; HABITAT STRUCTURE;
   WESTERN GREECE; ASSEMBLAGES; STREAMS; TRAITS; HETEROGENEITY; ECOSYSTEMS;
   REDUNDANCY
AB Benthic macroinvertebrate communities form the basis of the intricate lagoonal food web. Understanding their functional and taxonomic response, from a beta-diversity perspective, is essential to disclose underlying patterns with potential applicability in conservation and management actions. Within the central lagoon of Messolonghi, we studied the main environmental components structuring the macroinvertebrate community. We analyzed the beta-taxonomic and beta-functional diversity across the main habitats and seasons, over a year time frame. Our results outline habitat type and vegetation biomass as the major factors structuring the communities. We found environmental variability to have a positive correlation with functional beta-diversity; however, no correlation was found with taxonomic a-diversity.
   Across the seasons, an asynchronous response of the functional and taxonomic beta-diversity was identified. The taxonomic composition displayed significant heterogeneity during the driest period and the functional composition during the rainy season. Across the habitats, the unvegetated ones presented higher taxonomic homogeneity and functional heterogeneity, contrary to the vegetated habitats that present higher taxonomic variability and functional homogeneity. Across the seasons and habitats, a pattern of functional redundancy and taxonomic replacement was identified. Moreover, high functional turnover versus low taxonomic turnover was documented in an anthropogenic organically enriched habitat
   We conclude that habitats display independent functional and taxonomic seasonal patterns and, thus, different processes may contribute to their variability. The framework presented here highlights the importance of studying both a-diversity components framed in a multi-scale approach for a better understanding of ecological processes and variability patterns. These results are importantfor understanding macroinvertebrate community assembly processes and are valuable for conservation purposes.
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 1108-393X
PY 2017
VL 18
IS 1
BP 121
EP 133
DI 10.12681/mms.1844
SC Fisheries; Geology; Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000399341900013
ER

PT J
AU Rodriguez, C
   Navarro, T
   El-Keblawy, A
AF Rodriguez, Carmen
   Navarro, Teresa
   El-Keblawy, Ali
TI Covariation in diaspore mass and dispersal patterns in three
   Mediterranean coastal dunes in southern Spain
SO TURKISH JOURNAL OF BOTANY
DT Article
DE Antitelechoric mechanisms; coastal dunes; diaspore mass; dispersal
   modes; Mediterranean vegetation; spatial dispersal
ID PLANT FUNCTIONAL TYPES; EVOLUTION; GERMINATION; POPULATION; LANDSCAPES;
   STRATEGIES; TRAITS; FORM
AB The coastal dunes of southern Spain are an original Mediterranean ecosystem, insufficiently studied under dispersal. This study explores covariation patterns among diaspore mass, size, morphology, dispersal mode, and spatial dispersal in 78 native coastal dune species. Three coastal dunes under different climates were sampled and differentiated between fixed and mobile dunes. The Perez-Harguindeguy methodology was applied and ANOVA, Kruskal-Wallis, and Mann-Whitney U tests were used in order to analyze the covariation. Diaspores were essentially small seeds or achenes (2-4 mm, from 10-5 to 1 g). The study revealed that diaspore mass is a key trait in the differentiation among dunes. Diaspore sizes vary between fixed and mobile dunes, and the smallest diaspores were overrepresented in Mediterranean-subdesert and in mobile dunes. The dispersal mode differed between the dunes and between fixed and mobile dunes. Anemochory was greater in Mediterranean-subdesert (50%) compared with Mediterranean-oceanic (8.5%) and Mediterranean-subtropical (9.5%) dunes and with mobile dunes (46.4%). Restricted dispersal is overrepresented in Mediterranean-oceanic dunes whereas developed spatial dispersal is in subdesert dunes. It has been shown how coastal dunes under variations in the Mediterranean climate could show differences of dispersal traits. Mobile dunes show dispersal patterns closer to those found in Mediterranean-subdesert dunes.
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 1300-008X
EI 1303-6106
PY 2017
VL 41
IS 2
DI 10.3906/bot-1602-26
SC Plant Sciences
UT WOS:000398038400005
ER

PT J
AU Berge, T
   Chakraborty, S
   Hansen, PJ
   Andersen, KH
AF Berge, Terje
   Chakraborty, Subhendu
   Hansen, Per Juel
   Andersen, Ken H.
TI Modeling succession of key resource-harvesting traits of mixotrophic
   plankton
SO ISME JOURNAL
DT Article
ID DINOFLAGELLATE KARLODINIUM-ARMIGER; FRAGILIDIUM-SUBGLOBOSUM;
   GYRODINIUM-GALATHEANUM; GRAZING RESPONSES; LIGHT-INTENSITY; TRADE-OFFS;
   GROWTH; PHYTOPLANKTON; DINOPHYCEAE; PHOTOSYNTHESIS
AB Unicellular eukaryotes make up the base of the ocean food web and exist as a continuum in trophic strategy from pure heterotrophy (phagotrophic zooplankton) to pure photoautotrophy ('phytoplankton'), with a dominance of mixotrophic organisms combining both strategies. Here we formulate a trait-based model for mixotrophy with three key resource-harvesting traits: photosynthesis, phagotrophy and inorganic nutrient uptake, which predicts the trophic strategy of species throughout the seasonal cycle. Assuming that simple carbohydrates from photosynthesis fuel respiration, and feeding primarily provides building blocks for growth, the model reproduces the observed light-dependent ingestion rates and species-specific growth rates with and without prey from the laboratory. The combination of traits yielding the highest growth rate suggests high investments in photosynthesis, and inorganic nutrient uptake in the spring and increased phagotrophy during the summer, reflecting general seasonal succession patterns of temperate waters. Our trait-based model presents a simple and general approach for the inclusion of mixotrophy, succession and evolution in ecosystem models.
RI Hansen, Per/E-9969-2011
OI Hansen, Per/0000-0003-0228-9621; Andersen, Ken Haste/0000-0002-8478-3430
TC 5
Z9 5
SN 1751-7362
EI 1751-7370
PD JAN
PY 2017
VL 11
IS 1
BP 212
EP 223
DI 10.1038/ismej.2016.92
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Microbiology
UT WOS:000394537700019
PM 27482925
ER

PT J
AU Hebert, MP
   Beisner, BE
   Maranger, R
AF Hebert, Marie-Pier
   Beisner, Beatrix E.
   Maranger, Roxane
TI Linking zooplankton communities to ecosystem functioning: toward an
   effect-trait framework
SO JOURNAL OF PLANKTON RESEARCH
DT Article
DE body size; ecophysiology; ecosystem function; energy budget; functional
   traits; trade-offs
ID METABOLIC THEORY; TRADE-OFFS; MARINE COPEPODS; GROWTH-RATES;
   PHYTOPLANKTON; ECOLOGY; NITROGEN; DYNAMICS; PLANKTON; SIZE
AB The renewed interest in trait-based approaches has offered a stimulating, conceptual framework for predicting species distributions, assessing community composition and determining biodiversity-ecosystem linkages. However, despite previous attempts to clarify trait terminology and its application, selecting ecologically meaningful traits that mechanistically link levels of biological organization remains a challenge in aquatic ecology. Response traits can be used to capture community assembly processes along environmental gradients, while effect traits hold the potential to predict ecosystem functions. Although effect traits related to organismal physiology and body composition best allow for extrapolation from individuals to ecosystem processes, such traits are still rarely incorporated within plankton functional approaches or classifications for numerous reasons. Synthesizing current knowledge on effect traits in zooplankton, we call for a better implementation of such metrics as descriptors of community structure. We then capitalize on concepts of bioenergetics and ecosystem ecology to propose a hierarchical framework for zooplankton trait classification, identifying key traits fulfilling organismal functions and linking these to ecosystem processes likely to be influenced. Our framework provides insight regarding trait trade-offs, with implications for feedbacks to ecosystems, aiming to bridge the gap between plankton community ecology and aquatic biogeochemistry.
OI Beisner, Beatrix/0000-0001-6972-6887; Maranger,
   Roxane/0000-0002-2509-4678
TC 8
Z9 8
SN 0142-7873
EI 1464-3774
PD JAN
PY 2017
VL 39
IS 1
BP 3
EP 12
DI 10.1093/plankt/fbw068
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000397101400002
ER

PT J
AU Avis, PG
   Gaswick, WC
   Tonkovich, GS
   Leacock, PR
AF Avis, Peter G.
   Gaswick, Wyatt C.
   Tonkovich, Gayle S.
   Leacock, Patrick R.
TI Monitoring fungi in ecological restorations of coastal Indiana, USA
SO RESTORATION ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE ectomycorrhizal; functional trait guild; macrofungi; restoration; soil
   exploration type
ID SOIL MICROBIAL COMMUNITY; ECTOMYCORRHIZAL FUNGI; ECOSYSTEM RESTORATION;
   PRAIRIE RESTORATION; OAK FORESTS; DIVERSITY; PATTERNS; NITROGEN;
   ESTABLISHMENT; MANAGEMENT
AB Monitoring of ecological restorations has rarely focused on fungi. In this study, we conduct a first-ever monitoring of macrofungi in ecological restorations of coastal Indiana (U.S.A.) and present an approach and considerations that can be followed elsewhere. Forty-two sites were surveyed over a 2-year period for the presence of saprotrophic, mycorrhizal, and parasitic macrofungi. Sites included those considered to be restoration, prerestoration, or reference and were in wooded, semiwooded, or grassland habitats. With 1,103 observations, 277 species of fungi were identified. Most fungi were found in wooded habitats though some were in grassland restorations. Invasive plant cover negatively impacted fungal species richness. Monitored sites were compared to a set of reference sites using two different similarity indices (overlap and Jaccard), as well as the ratios of different fungal functional guilds, revealing that choice of index can impact how restorations are perceived to match targets. Last, we present a novel, tractable, and conservative way to assess and rank sites by the functional trait guilds of fungi. We show that such an approach can provide important additional information about the success of restorations such that functional guild ratios could be used as an indicator of restoration progress early-on while functional values are better used in later phases.
TC 5
Z9 6
SN 1061-2971
EI 1526-100X
PD JAN
PY 2017
VL 25
IS 1
BP 92
EP 100
DI 10.1111/rec.12397
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000396475900012
ER

PT J
AU Frankova, M
   Sumberova, K
   Potuzak, J
   Vild, O
AF Frankova, Marketa
   Sumberova, Katerina
   Potuzak, Jan
   Vild, Ondrej
TI The role of plant substrate type in shaping the composition and
   diversity of epiphytic diatom assemblages in a eutrophic reservoir
SO FUNDAMENTAL AND APPLIED LIMNOLOGY
DT Article; Proceedings Paper
CT 10th Central European Diatom Meeting (CE-DiatoM)
CY APR 20-23, 2016
CL Budapest, HUNGARY
DE Czech Republic; diatoms; epiphyton; host plant; fishpond; functional
   types; substrate specificity
ID 3 SHALLOW LAKES; SUBMERGED MACROPHYTES; WATER-QUALITY; PERIPHYTON
   COLONIZATION; PHRAGMITES-AUSTRALIS; CHARA-TOMENTOSA; SPRING FENS; ALGAE;
   COMMUNITIES; BIOMASS
AB Epiphytic diatom communities from the Dehtaf fishpond (Czech Republic) were studied in terms of species composition, diversity and functional traits. We asked whether variability among samples is determined by sampled substrate (macrophyte species) or location (sampling site). Twenty-one samples of eleven species of vascular plants (predominantly aquatic macrophytes) and one charophyte species were collected at three sites within the fishpond during one sampling event in June 2015. Altogether, 129 diatom taxa were identified. Species richness ranged from 14 to 46 taxa per sample, with the highest richness for Elatine hydropiper and the lowest for Chara braunii. Surprisingly, the representation of typically periphytic taxa (attached to the substrate) was very low, and did not exceed 16 %. Genera typical for epiphyton were present only marginally. The exception was Gomphonema parvulum agg. On the other hand, facultatively periphytic species of the Fragilariales were dominant as well as motile raphid taxa of the Naviculales. Species assemblages at the three sampling sites differed significantly, including the subset of periphytic diatoms. Species composition at the fishpond dam was more represented by typically periphytic taxa, while the other two sites (bays of the Babicky and Dehtafslcy streams) were dominated by facultatively periphytic taxa, mainly Pseudostaurosira elliptica. These differences can be explained by the differences in environmental conditions among the sites, especially very intensive and frequent wave action typical for most parts of the Dehtaf fishpond. However, no significant differences in diatom species composition dependent on the species of sampled plant substrate were found.
TC 1
Z9 2
SN 1863-9135
PD JAN
PY 2017
VL 189
IS 2
SI SI
BP 117
EP 135
DI 10.1127/fal/2016/0936
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000395223500004
ER

PT J
AU Saulino, HHL
   Trivinho-Strixino, S
AF Lanzi Saulino, Hugo Henrique
   Trivinho-Strixino, Susana
TI The invasive white ginger lily (Hedichium coronarium) simplifies the
   trait composition of an insect assemblage in the littoral zone of a
   Savanna reservoir
SO REVISTA BRASILEIRA DE ENTOMOLOGIA
DT Article
DE Biodiversity; Biological invasions; Functional diversity; Lentic system
ID FUNCTIONAL FEEDING GROUPS; MACROINVERTEBRATE ASSEMBLAGE; AQUATIC
   INSECTS; LAND-USE; HABITAT; STREAMS; BRAZIL; DIVERSITY; LAKE;
   CHIRONOMIDAE
AB The invasive white ginger lily (Hedichium coronarium - J. Koenig, 1783) simplifies the trait composition of an insect assemblage in the littoral zone of a Savanna reservoir. Invasive plants are believed to shift the trait composition of aquatic insects dwelling in banks of lentic ecosystems. In this study, we analyzed the relationship between the presence of the invasive white ginger lily (H. coronarium) and the functional trait indices of the aquatic insect assemblage in the littoral zone of a tropical reservoir. We sampled aquatic insects on the invaded and non-invaded banks of the reservoir and then analyzed the insect trait indices by estimating the Functional Dispersion (FDis), Functional Evenness (FEve) and the Functional Divergence (FDiv), as well as the Community level Weight-Mean traits (CWM). Finally, we compared these indices between invaded and non-invaded banks as well as their relationship with the abiotic variables, such as dissolved oxygen, pH, depth and water temperature. The result confirmed that the invaded banks had lower values of functional indices as well as dissolved oxygen. However, this abiotic variable was found to have no effect on the functional indices. In addition, the white ginger lily bank presented higher contribution of collector-gathering to predator-piercer groups. We suggest that the invasion of white ginger lily promotes low heterogeneity habitat resulting in simplification on functional traits of aquatic insect assemblage. (C) 2016 Sociedade Brasileira de Entomologia. Published by Elsevier Editora Ltda.
RI Saulino, Hugo Henrique/C-2449-2014
OI Saulino, Hugo Henrique/0000-0002-4725-7239
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0085-5626
EI 1806-9665
PD JAN-MAR
PY 2017
VL 61
IS 1
BP 60
EP 68
DI 10.1016/j.rbe.2016.12.003
SC Entomology
UT WOS:000397015800007
ER

PT J
AU Chu, ND
   Clarke, SA
   Timberlake, S
   Polz, MF
   Grossman, AD
   Alm, EJ
AF Chu, Nathaniel D.
   Clarke, Sean A.
   Timberlake, Sonia
   Polz, Martin F.
   Grossman, Alan D.
   Alm, Eric J.
TI A Mobile Element in mutS Drives Hypermutation in a Marine Vibrio
SO MBIO
DT Article
ID PATHOGENIC ESCHERICHIA-COLI; STRESS-INDUCED MUTAGENESIS;
   PSEUDOMONAS-AERUGINOSA; ADAPTIVE EVOLUTION; ANTIBIOTIC-RESISTANCE;
   SPONTANEOUS MUTATIONS; SOS RESPONSE; BACTERIA; REPAIR; MISMATCH
AB Bacteria face a trade-off between genetic fidelity, which reduces deleterious mistakes in the genome, and genetic innovation, which allows organisms to adapt. Evidence suggests that many bacteria balance this trade-off by modulating their mutation rates, but few mechanisms have been described for such modulation. Following experimental evolution and whole-genome resequencing of the marine bacterium Vibrio splendidus 12B01, we discovered one such mechanism, which allows this bacterium to switch to an elevated mutation rate. This switch is driven by the excision of a mobile element residing in mutS, which encodes a DNA mismatch repair protein. When integrated within the bacterial genome, the mobile element provides independent promoter and translation start sequences for mutS-different from the bacterium's original mutS promoter region-which allow the bacterium to make a functional mutS gene product. Excision of this mobile element rejoins the mutS gene with host promoter and translation start sequences but leaves a 2-bp deletion in the mutS sequence, resulting in a frameshift and a hypermutator phenotype. We further identified hundreds of clinical and environmental bacteria across Betaproteobacteria and Gammaproteobacteria that possess putative mobile elements within the same amino acid motif in mutS. In a subset of these bacteria, we detected excision of the element but not a frameshift mutation; the mobile elements leave an intact mutS coding sequence after excision. Our findings reveal a novel mechanism by which one bacterium alters its mutation rate and hint at a possible evolutionary role for mobile elements within mutS in other bacteria. IMPORTANCE DNA mutations are a double-edged sword. Most mutations are harmful; they can scramble precise genetic sequences honed over thousands of generations. But in rare cases, mutations also produce beneficial new traits that allow populations to adapt to changing environments. Recent evidence suggests that some bacteria balance this trade-off by altering their mutation rates to suit their environment. To date, however, we know of few mechanisms that allow bacteria to change their mutation rates. We describe one such mechanism, driven by the action of a mobile element, in the marine bacterium Vibrio splendidus 12B01. We also found similar mobile genetic sequences in the mutS genes of many different bacteria, including clinical and agricultural pathogens. These mobile elements might play an as yet unknown role in the evolution of these important bacteria.
TC 5
Z9 5
SN 2150-7511
PD JAN-FEB
PY 2017
VL 8
IS 1
AR e02045-16
DI 10.1128/mBio.02045-16
SC Microbiology
UT WOS:000395835000010
PM 28174306
ER

PT J
AU Suarez, ML
   Sanchez-Montoya, MM
   Gomez, R
   Arce, MI
   del Campo, R
   Vidal-Abarca, MR
AF Suarez, M. L.
   Sanchez-Montoya, M. M.
   Gomez, R.
   Arce, M. I.
   del Campo, R.
   Vidal-Abarca, M. R.
TI Functional response of aquatic invertebrate communities along two
   natural stress gradients (water salinity and flow intermittence) in
   Mediterranean streams
SO AQUATIC SCIENCES
DT Article
DE Biological traits; Functional redundancy; Functional richness;
   Freshwater streams; Intermittent streams; Saline streams
ID MACROINVERTEBRATE ASSEMBLAGES; ECOSYSTEM PROCESSES; BIOLOGICAL TRAITS;
   HEADWATER STREAMS; BIODIVERSITY; REDUNDANCY; DIVERSITY; PATTERNS;
   SERVICES; CONSERVATION
AB Functional trait diversity can provide insight into ecosystem function beyond that provided by species diversity measures. The relationship between functional diversity and natural stressors has received less attention compared to anthropogenic stressors. In this study, we investigated how two natural stressors, water salinity and flow intermittence, affect functional richness and functional redundancy of aquatic invertebrate communities using seven biological traits and 39 modalities. For this purpose, we characterized these functional diversity measures in 22 Mediterranean streams with a gradient of natural salinity and flow intermittence. Our findings showed that both functional richness and functional redundancy decreased with increased stress by water salinity and flow intermittence for all the studied traits but more rapidly for the former, suggesting that water salinity is a stronger environmental stressor than flow intermittence. Our study also described an antagonistic interaction of the two study stressors, in which the net effect of both is less than the sum of their independent effects. This study emphasizes that in saline streams, characterized by lower functional richness and functional redundancy, the loss of any taxon can have a huge impact on community functioning. In particular, the functional singularity of saline intermittent streams makes them extremely sensitive to additional anthropogenic impacts. In the context of future global change scenarios, which predict higher flow intermittence and water salinity, this study gives a better understanding of the functional features of these types of ecosystems.
RI Suarez Alonso, Maria Luisa/L-3380-2014; Vidal-Abarca, Maria
   Rosario/L-3403-2014
OI Suarez Alonso, Maria Luisa/0000-0003-0420-4919; Vidal-Abarca, Maria
   Rosario/0000-0002-2225-0727; arce, maria isabel/0000-0001-7407-3884; del
   Campo, Ruben/0000-0002-0560-831X
TC 4
Z9 5
SN 1015-1621
EI 1420-9055
PD JAN
PY 2017
VL 79
IS 1
BP 1
EP 12
DI 10.1007/s00027-016-0475-2
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000394107900001
ER

PT J
AU Kumar, KVA
   Tuset, VM
   Manjebrayakath, H
   Sumod, KS
   Sudhakar, M
   Otero-Ferrer, JL
   Lombarte, A
AF Kumar, K. V. Aneesh
   Tuset, V. M.
   Manjebrayakath, Hashim
   Sumod, K. S.
   Sudhakar, M.
   Otero-Ferrer, J. L.
   Lombarte, A.
TI Functional approach reveals low niche overlap among common deep-sea
   fishes from the south-eastern Arabian Sea
SO DEEP-SEA RESEARCH PART I-OCEANOGRAPHIC RESEARCH PAPERS
DT Article
DE Functional traits; Niche overlap; Resource partitioning; Deep-sea
   fishes; South-eastern Arabian Sea
ID BENTHIC BOUNDARY-LAYER; SPECIES COEXISTENCE; CENTRARCHID FISHES;
   COMMUNITY ECOLOGY; ATLANTIC SALMON; PREY CAPTURE; DIVERSITY;
   ASSEMBLAGES; MORPHOLOGY; LOCOMOTION
AB It is necessary to understand the resource partitioning among species, to describe the functioning of deep sea marine ecosystems. Functional morphology is an effective approach to understand and compare taxonomic units with different phenotypic characteristics related to swimming and foraging. In this study, our main objective was to delineate the functional traits with a view to determine the discrimination level and degree of functional niche overlap among seven common species inhabiting deep-sea waters in south-eastern Arabian Sea. Results indicated significant differences in the functional traits between species providing a low functional niche overlap. Although, the ecological and biological information of fishes were scarce, we demonstrated that functional analyses are effective to extrapolate the prey preferences, sizes and detection and propulsion efficiencies for their feeding and swimming strategies. Our study supports the hypothesis that in some environments with a limitation of resources, species coexisting is due to high resource partitioning. The present work is a first attempt to compare the morpho-functional characteristics and niche partitioning in the deep-sea fish assemblages from the Indian waters.
RI Tuset, Victor/A-9132-2019; Lombarte, Antoni/D-3142-2013
OI Tuset, Victor/0000-0001-9032-2844; Lombarte, Antoni/0000-0001-5215-4587
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 0967-0637
EI 1879-0119
PD JAN
PY 2017
VL 119
BP 16
EP 23
DI 10.1016/j.dsr.2016.11.011
SC Oceanography
UT WOS:000393256400002
ER

PT J
AU Pais, AL
   Whetten, RW
   Xiang, QY
AF Pais, Andrew L.
   Whetten, Ross W.
   Xiang, Qiu-Yun (Jenny)
TI Ecological genomics of local adaptation in Cornus florida L. by
   genotyping by sequencing
SO ECOLOGY AND EVOLUTION
DT Article
DE Cornus florida; genotyping by sequencing; local adaptation; single
   nucleotide polymorphisms
ID DOGWOOD ANTHRACNOSE; POPULATION-STRUCTURE; DISCULA-DESTRUCTIVA;
   GENETIC-VARIATION; OSMOTIC-STRESS; CLIMATE-CHANGE; NORTH-AMERICA; TOOL
   SET; DE-NOVO; SELECTION
AB Discovering local adaptation, its genetic underpinnings, and environmental drivers is important for conserving forest species. Ecological genomic approaches coupled with next-generation sequencing are useful means to detect local adaptation and uncover its underlying genetic basis in nonmodel species. We report results from a study on flowering dogwood trees (Cornus florida L.) using genotyping by sequencing (GBS). This species is ecologically important to eastern US forests but is severely threatened by fungal diseases. We analyzed subpopulations in divergent ecological habitats within North Carolina to uncover loci under local selection and associated with environmental-functional traits or disease infection. At this scale, we tested the effect of incorporating additional sequencing before scaling for a broader examination of the entire range. To test for biases of GBS, we sequenced two similarly sampled libraries independently from six populations of three ecological habitats. We obtained environmental-functional traits for each subpopulation to identify associations with genotypes via latent factor mixed modeling (LFMM) and gradient forests analysis. To test whether heterogeneity of abiotic pressures resulted in genetic differentiation indicative of local adaptation, we evaluated F-st per locus while accounting for genetic differentiation between coastal subpopulations and Piedmont-Mountain subpopulations. Of the 54 candidate loci with sufficient evidence of being under selection among both libraries, 28-39 were Arlequin-BayeScan F-st outliers. For LFMM, 45 candidates were associated with climate (of 54), 30 were associated with soil properties, and four were associated with plant health. Reanalysis of combined libraries showed that 42 candidate loci still showed evidence of being under selection. We conclude environment-driven selection on specific loci has resulted in local adaptation in response to potassium deficiencies, temperature, precipitation, and (to a marginal extent) disease. High allele turnover along ecological gradients further supports the adaptive significance of loci speculated to be under selection.
TC 7
Z9 7
SN 2045-7758
PD JAN
PY 2017
VL 7
IS 1
BP 441
EP 465
DI 10.1002/ece3.2623
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000392069500037
PM 28070306
ER

PT J
AU Caswell, BA
   Frid, CLJ
AF Caswell, Bryony A.
   Frid, Christopher L. J.
TI Marine ecosystem resilience during extreme deoxygenation: the Early
   Jurassic oceanic anoxic event
SO OECOLOGIA
DT Article
DE Hypoxia; Palaeoecology; Dead zone; Toarcian; Biological traits;
   Long-term change
ID CARBON-ISOTOPE EXCURSION; MASS EXTINCTION; THEORETICAL ECOSPACE; FOSSIL
   ASSEMBLAGES; ORGANIC-MATTER; TOARCIAN; OXYGEN; HYPOXIA; RECORD; BASIN
AB Global warming during the Early Jurassic, and associated widespread ocean deoxygenation, was comparable in scale with the changes projected for the next century. This study quantifies the impact of severe global environmental change on the biological traits of marine communities that define the ecological roles and functions they deliver. We document centennial-millennial variability in the biological trait composition of Early Jurassic (Toarcian) seafloor communities and examine how this changed during the event using biological traits analysis. Environmental changes preceding the global oceanic anoxic event (OAE) produced an ecological shift leading to stressed benthic palaeocommunities with reduced resilience to the subsequent OAE. Changes in traits and ecological succession coincided with major environmental changes; and were of similar nature and magnitude to those in severely deoxygenated benthic communities today despite the very different timescales. Changes in community composition were linked to local redox conditions whereas changes in populations of opportunists were driven by primary productivity. Throughout most of the OAE substitutions by tolerant taxa conserved the trait composition and hence functioning, but periods of severe deoxygenation caused benthic defaunation that would have resulted in functional collapse. Following the OAE recovery was slow probably because the global nature of the event restricted opportunities for recruitment from outside the basin. Our findings suggest that future systems undergoing deoxygenation may initially show functional resilience, but severe global deoxygenation will impact traits and ecosystem functioning and, by limiting the species pool, will slow recovery rates.
TC 5
Z9 5
SN 0029-8549
EI 1432-1939
PD JAN
PY 2017
VL 183
IS 1
BP 275
EP 290
DI 10.1007/s00442-016-3747-6
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000392391300023
PM 27757544
ER

PT J
AU Fitzgerald, DB
   Winemiller, KO
   Perez, MHS
   Sousa, LM
AF Fitzgerald, Daniel B.
   Winemiller, Kirk O.
   Perez, Mark H. Sabaj
   Sousa, Leandro M.
TI Seasonal changes in the assembly mechanisms structuring tropical fish
   communities
SO ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE Amazon Basin; diversity; functional trait; null model; temporal; Xingu
   River
ID LONG-TERM SUCCESSION; FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; COMPETITIVE-EXCLUSION;
   ENVIRONMENTAL GRADIENTS; LIMITING SIMILARITY; SPATIAL SCALES; STREAM
   FISHES; PATCH SCALE; RIVER; RESPONSES
AB Despite growing interest in trait-based approaches to community assembly, little attention has been given to seasonal variation in trait distribution patterns. Mobile animals can rapidly mediate influences of environmental factors and species interactions through dispersal, suggesting that the relative importance of different assembly mechanisms can vary over short time scales. This study analyzes seasonal changes in functional trait distributions of tropical fishes in the Xingu River, a major tributary of the Amazon with large predictable temporal variation in hydrologic conditions and species density. Comparison of observed functional diversity revealed that species within wet-season assemblages were more functionally similar than those in dry-season assemblages. Further, species within wet-season assemblages were more similar than random expectations based on null model predictions. Higher functional richness within dry season communities is consistent with increased niche complementarity during the period when fish densities are highest and biotic interactions should be stronger; however, null model tests suggest that stochastic factors or a combination of assembly mechanisms influence dry-season assemblages. These results demonstrate that the relative influence of community assembly mechanisms can vary seasonally in response to changing abiotic conditions, and suggest that studies attempting to infer a single dominant mechanism from functional patterns may overlook important aspects of the assembly process. During the prolonged flood pulse of the wet season, expanded habitat and lower densities of aquatic organisms likely reduce the influence of competition and predation. This temporal shift in the influence of different assembly mechanisms, rather than any single mechanism, may play a large role in maintaining the structure and diversity of tropical rivers and perhaps other dynamic and biodiverse systems.
RI Sousa, Leandro/I-6108-2012
OI Sousa, Leandro/0000-0002-0793-9737
TC 12
Z9 13
SN 0012-9658
EI 1939-9170
PD JAN
PY 2017
VL 98
IS 1
BP 21
EP 31
DI 10.1002/ecy.1616
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000391862900003
PM 27984648
ER

PT J
AU Lefcheck, JS
   Marion, SR
   Orth, RJ
AF Lefcheck, Jonathan S.
   Marion, Scott R.
   Orth, Robert J.
TI Restored Eelgrass (Zostera marina L.) as a Refuge for Epifaunal
   Biodiversity in Mid-Western Atlantic Coastal Bays
SO ESTUARIES AND COASTS
DT Article
DE Seagrass; Restoration; Functional traits; Grazers
ID RAOS QUADRATIC ENTROPY; LONG-TERM SUCCESSION; FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY;
   TOP-DOWN; COMMUNITY STRUCTURE; SEAGRASS ECOSYSTEM; RESTORATION;
   CONSERVATION; RECOVERY; USA
AB As nearshore ecosystems are increasingly degraded by human activities, active restoration is a critical strategy in ensuring the continued provision of goods and services by coastal habitats. After being absent for nearly six decades, over 1800 ha of the foundational species eelgrass (Zostera marina L.) has been successfully re-established in the coastal bays of the mid-western Atlantic, USA, but nothing is known about the recovery of associated animal communities in this region. Here, we determine the patterns and drivers of functional recovery in epifaunal invertebrates associated with the restored eelgrass habitat from 2001 to 2013. After less than a decade, the invertebrate community in the restored bed was richer, more even, and exhibited greater variation in functional traits than a nearby reference bed. Analysis of a suite of environmental and physical variables using random forests revealed these differences were primarily due to the increasing area and density of eelgrass, a direct consequence of ongoing restoration efforts. Based on analysis of functional traits, we propose that the rapid life histories of constituent organisms may have played a key role in their successful recovery. We also speculate that diverse epifaunal communities may have contributed to the restoration success through a well-described mutualism with eelgrass. Given that restored eelgrass now make up 32 % of total seagrass cover in the mid-Atlantic coastal bays, this restoration may conserve regional biodiversity by providing new and pristine habitat, particularly given the general decline of existing eelgrass in this region.
OI Lefcheck, Jonathan/0000-0002-8787-1786
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 1559-2723
EI 1559-2731
PD JAN
PY 2017
VL 40
IS 1
BP 200
EP 212
DI 10.1007/s12237-016-0141-x
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000391456600015
ER

PT J
AU Gould, BA
   Chen, YN
   Lowry, DB
AF Gould, Billie A.
   Chen, Yani
   Lowry, David B.
TI Pooled ecotype sequencing reveals candidate genetic mechanisms for
   adaptive differentiation and reproductive isolation
SO MOLECULAR ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE adaptation; ecotype; genomics; inversion; Mimulus; pool-seq; salt
   tolerance; speciation
ID RECOMBINATION RATE VARIATION; GUTTATUS SPECIES COMPLEX;
   MIMULUS-GUTTATUS; LOCAL ADAPTATION; DROSOPHILA-MELANOGASTER;
   GREEN-REVOLUTION; CHROMOSOMAL REARRANGEMENTS; ECOLOGICAL SPECIATION;
   PHENOTYPIC DIVERGENCE; ARABIDOPSIS-THALIANA
AB The early stages of speciation are often characterized by the formation of partially reproductively isolated ecotypes, which evolve as a by-product of divergent selective forces that are endemic to different habitats. Identifying the genomic regions, genes and ultimately functional polymorphisms that are involved in the processes of ecotype formation is inherently challenging, as there are likely to be many different loci involved in the process. To localize candidate regions of the genome contributing to ecotype formation, we conducted whole-genome pooled sequencing (pool-seq) with 47 coastal perennial and 50 inland annual populations of the yellow monkeyflower, Mimulus guttatus. Coastal perennial and inland annual ecotypes of M. guttatus have previously been shown to be ecologically reproductively isolated and highly locally adapted to their respective habitats. Our pool-seq results found allelic differentiation between the ecotypes for two chromosomal inversions, suggesting that frequencies of inversion heterokaryotypes are strongly differentiated between the ecotypes. Further, there were elevated levels of nonsynonymous change across chromosomal inversions. Across the genome, we identified multiple strong candidate genes potentially driving the morphological, life history and salt tolerance differences between the ecotypes. Several candidate genes coincide with previously identified quantitative trait locus regions and also show a signature of recent natural selection. Overall, the results of our study add to growing support for a major role of chromosomal inversions in adaptation and speciation and provide new insights into the genetic mechanisms underlying classic plant ecotype adaptations to wet and dry habitats.
TC 11
Z9 11
SN 0962-1083
EI 1365-294X
PD JAN
PY 2017
VL 26
IS 1
SI SI
BP 163
EP 177
DI 10.1111/mec.13881
SC Biochemistry & Molecular Biology; Environmental Sciences & Ecology;
   Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000391940600011
PM 27747958
ER

PT J
AU Kusakabe, M
   Ishikawa, A
   Ravinet, M
   Yoshida, K
   Makino, T
   Toyoda, A
   Fujiyama, A
   Kitano, J
AF Kusakabe, Makoto
   Ishikawa, Asano
   Ravinet, Mark
   Yoshida, Kohta
   Makino, Takashi
   Toyoda, Atsushi
   Fujiyama, Asao
   Kitano, Jun
TI Genetic basis for variation in salinity tolerance between stickleback
   ecotypes
SO MOLECULAR ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE anadromous; ATPase; FST differentiation; osmoregulation
ID CHARR SALVELINUS-ALPINUS; EURYHALINE MOZAMBIQUE TILAPIA; TIGHT JUNCTION
   PROTEINS; GASTEROSTEUS-ACULEATUS; THREESPINE STICKLEBACKS;
   OREOCHROMIS-MOSSAMBICUS; ECOLOGICAL SPECIATION; 3-SPINED STICKLEBACK;
   PARALLEL EVOLUTION; ADAPTIVE EVOLUTION
AB Adaptation to different salinities can drive and maintain divergence between populations of aquatic organisms. Anadromous and stream ecotypes of threespine stickleback (Gasterosteus aculeatus) are an excellent model to explore the genetic mechanisms underlying osmoregulation divergence. Using a parapatric pair of anadromous and stream stickleback ecotypes, we employed an integrated genomic approach to identify candidate genes important for adaptation to different salinity environments. Quantitative trait loci (QTL) mapping of plasma sodium concentrations under a seawater challenge experiment identified a significant QTL on chromosome 16. To identify candidate genes within this QTL, we first conducted RNA-seq and microarray analysis on gill tissue to find ecotypic differences in gene expression that were associated with plasma Na+ levels. This resulted in the identification of ten candidate genes. Quantitative PCR analysis on gill tissue of additional Japanese stickleback populations revealed that the majority of the candidate genes showed parallel divergence in expression levels. Second, we conducted whole-genome sequencing and found five genes that are predicted to have functionally important amino acid substitutions. Finally, we conducted genome scan analysis and found that eight of these candidate genes were located in genomic islands of high differentiation, suggesting that they may be under divergent selection. The candidate genes included those involved in ATP synthesis and hormonal signalling, whose expression or amino acid changes may underlie the variation in salinity tolerance. Further functional molecular analysis of these genes will reveal the causative genetic and genomic changes underlying divergent adaptation.
RI Ishikawa, Asano/U-8590-2018
OI Ishikawa, Asano/0000-0003-1628-8339; Ravinet, Mark/0000-0002-2841-1798
TC 14
Z9 14
SN 0962-1083
EI 1365-294X
PD JAN
PY 2017
VL 26
IS 1
SI SI
BP 304
EP 319
DI 10.1111/mec.13875
SC Biochemistry & Molecular Biology; Environmental Sciences & Ecology;
   Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000391940600020
PM 27706866
ER

PT J
AU Ding, N
   Yang, WF
   Zhou, YL
   Gonzalez-Bergonzoni, I
   Zhang, J
   Chen, K
   Vidal, N
   Jeppesen, E
   Liu, ZW
   Wang, BX
AF Ding, Ning
   Yang, Weifang
   Zhou, Yunlei
   Gonzalez-Bergonzoni, Ivan
   Zhang, Jie
   Chen, Kai
   Vidal, Nicolas
   Jeppesen, Erik
   Liu, Zhengwen
   Wang, Beixin
TI Different responses of functional traits and diversity of stream
   macroinvertebrates to environmental and spatial factors in the
   Xishuangbanna watershed of the upper Mekong River Basin, China
SO SCIENCE OF THE TOTAL ENVIRONMENT
DT Article
DE Benthic macroinvertebrates; Bioassessment Biological traits; Functional
   diversity; Land use
ID SPECIES TRAITS; BENTHIC-MACROINVERTEBRATES; BIOLOGICAL TRAITS; FISH
   ASSEMBLAGES; LAND-USE; INVERTEBRATE COMMUNITIES; HEADWATER STREAMS;
   REFERENCE SITES; FINE SEDIMENT; LONG-TERM
AB Functional traits and diversity indices have provided new insights into community responses to stressors. Most traits of aquatic organisms have frequently been tested for predictability and geographical stability in response to environmental variables, but such tests of functional diversity indices are rare. We sampled macroinverte-brates at 18 reference sites (RS) and 35 disturbed sites (DS) from headwater streams in the upper Mekong River Basin, Xishuangbanna (XSBN), China. We selected 29 qualitative categories of eight traits and then calculated five functional diversity indices, namely functional richness (FRic), functional evenness (FEve), functional dispersion (FDis), functional divergence (FDiv) and Rao's Quadratic Entropy (RaoQ), and two trait diversity indices, namely trait richness (TR) and trait diversity (TD). We used combination of RLQand fourth-corner to examine the response of traits and functional diversity to the disturbance and environmental variables. We used variance partitioning to explore the relative role of environmental variables and spatial factors in constraining trait composition and functional diversity. We found that the relative frequency of ten trait categories, and the values of TD, TR, FRic and FDis in RS were significantly different (p < 0.05) from DS. In addition, the seven traits (except for "habit") demonstrated a predictable response of trait patterns along the integrative environmental gradients. Environmental variables significantly contributed to most of the traits, functional diversity and trait diversity. However, spatial variables were mainly significant in shaping ecological traits, FRic and FEve. Our results confirm the dominant role of environmental variables in the determination of community trait composition and functional diversity, and substantiate the contribution of spatial vectors in explaining the variance of functional traits and diversity. We conclude that the traits "Refuge", "External protection", "Respiration" and "Body shape", and diversity indices FDis, TD, and TR are promising indicators of stream conditions at XSBN. (C) 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
TC 9
Z9 12
SN 0048-9697
EI 1879-1026
PD JAN 1
PY 2017
VL 574
BP 288
EP 299
DI 10.1016/j.sdtotenv.2016.09.053
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000389090100029
PM 27639026
ER

PT B
AU Simm, S
   Schleiff, E
   Pernil, R
AF Simm, Stefan
   Schleiff, Enrico
   Pernil, Rafael
BE Los, DA
TI The Cyanobacterial Core Genome: Global and Specific Features with a
   Focus on Secondary Metabolites
SO CYANOBACTERIA: OMICS AND MANIPULATION
DT Article; Book Chapter
ID BACTERIAL PAN-GENOME; NONRIBOSOMAL PEPTIDE SYNTHETASES; BIOSYNTHETIC
   GENE CLUSTERS; MODULAR POLYKETIDE SYNTHASES; ASSEMBLY-LINE ENZYMOLOGY;
   SP STRAIN PCC-7120; NATURAL-PRODUCTS; MARINE CYANOBACTERIA; SIGNATURE
   GENES; MICROBIAL COMMUNITY
AB The technological progress done in next generation sequencing (NGS) has enabled to perform genome analyses of environments to understand microbial communities through metagenomics and, by this, has increased the variety of available sequenced genomes. The high number of DNA sequencing genome projects in the last years has created an archive of similar to 20,000 fully sequenced prokaryotic genomes that has influenced the current research. By this, multi-genome comparison approaches like pangenome analysis become of major importance to boost the understanding of the complexity of biological systems. Such analyses range from the definition of taxa composition in specific environments by metagenomics, investigations of evolutionary relations and assignments of core-and pangenomes to the definition of core gene sets, and even the correlation of specific gene sets for biological functions, phenotypes or traits in cyanobacteria. In this regard, the challenge to handle and use appropriately the increasing amount of information is of major importance. For this reason, data handling, analysis and visualization will be described in this chapter from a bioinformatics point of view. The following sections will explain in detail the general applications of metagenomics and pangenomics and their benefits on the cyanobacteria research field. Metagenomics was used in the past to analyse the taxonomic composition and functional characteristics of cyanobacterial communities in different habitats such as oceans or environments with extreme temperatures or salt concentrations. Furthermore, differences between cultured and wild-living cyanobacteria and their acquisition and loss of genes in relation to changes in the availability of nutrients or metabolites can be investigated. In addition, new genomic elements or specific pathways for secondary metabolites could be also identified and biotechnologically used in the future, like the biosynthesis pathway of the anticancer agent curacin A (Jones et al., 2011). In the past, pangenome studies have been performed focusing on the identification of intraspecies gene sets. Similarly, pangenomes can be used to obtain evolutionary information by identifying the core-genome of interspecies comparisons in cyanobacteria and get insights into the acquisition and loss of genes within a specific clade or phylum. Furthermore, the core-genome plays a role in the identification of so-called signature genes that only occur in all or most of cyanobacteria. Pangenomics for cyanobacteria has helped to define the origin of photosynthesis and to analyse the diversity of metabolism. Furthermore, pan-and core-genome analyses have been used to identify trait-specific gene sets. In this context, cyanobacteria were clustered regarding their different traits to analyse subfractions of the pan-and core-genome of a specific environmental adaptation. For the correlation of pangenomics analysis and functional annotation of cyanobacteria, discrimination in core-genome and clade-specific functional annotation and determination of specific genes for a subset of cyanobacterial strains with either thermophilic character, growth habitat or the capability to differentiate heterocyst were analysed. In addition, the detection of core- and clade-specific functions in cyanobacteria via multi-genome comparison analyses is explained and exemplified using the gene sets of non-ribosomal peptide synthetases (NRPS) and polyketide synthases (PKS).
   Cyanobacteria are a prolific source of natural products and produce a vast array of compounds, including many notorious toxins as well as natural products of huge interest to pharmaceutical and biotechnological industries. Genome mining has enabled the identification and characterization of natural product gene clusters, and mechanisms that are unique to cyanobacteria, or rarely seen in other organisms, have been discovered. Many cyanobacterial secondary metabolites are cyanotoxins, which show a broad range of chemical structures and biological activities, but in addition to toxin production, also several NRPS and PKS gene clusters are devoted to important cellular processes in cyanobacteria such as iron uptake and nitrogen fixation. Most of the biosynthetic clusters identified here have unknown end products, highlighting the power of genome mining for the discovery of new secondary metabolites. These studies show that cyanobacteria encode a huge variety of cryptic gene clusters involved in the production of natural products, and the known chemical diversity to date is likely to be only a fraction of the true biosynthetic capabilities of this fascinating and ancient group of organisms. Furthermore, mechanistic insights obtained from the biochemical studies of cyanobacterial pathways can inspire the development of concepts for the design of bioactive compounds by synthetic-biology approaches in the future. Here, we survey the biosynthetic pathways of the top five most researched cyanobacterial species with the most extensive literature, including Microcystis aeruginosa NIES-843, Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803, Anabaena sp. PCC 7120, Arthrospira platensis NIES-39 and Synechococcus elongatus PCC 7942. These analyses have enabled the identification of biosynthetic gene clusters for structurally diverse metabolites, including non-ribosomal peptides, polyketides, ribosomal peptides, terpenes and fatty acids. We highlight the unique enzyme mechanisms that were elucidated or can be anticipated for the individual products, but further include different classes of secondary metabolites from cyanobacteria other than NRPS and PKS.
RI Schleiff, Enrico/C-5105-2017; CEF, MC/B-4919-2018
OI Schleiff, Enrico/0000-0002-0518-3489; 
TC 0
Z9 0
BN 978-1-910190-55-5; 978-1-910190-56-2
PY 2017
BP 1
EP 34
SC Microbiology
UT WOS:000388010300002
ER

PT J
AU Langasco, R
   Cadeddu, B
   Formato, M
   Lepedda, AJ
   Cossu, M
   Giunchedi, P
   Pronzato, R
   Rassu, G
   Manconi, R
   Gavini, E
AF Langasco, Rita
   Cadeddu, Barbara
   Formato, Marilena
   Lepedda, Antonio Junior
   Cossu, Massimo
   Giunchedi, Paolo
   Pronzato, Roberto
   Rassu, Giovanna
   Manconi, Renata
   Gavini, Elisabetta
TI Natural collagenic skeleton of marine sponges in pharmaceutics:
   Innovative biomaterial for topical drug delivery
SO MATERIALS SCIENCE & ENGINEERING C-MATERIALS FOR BIOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS
DT Article
DE Porifera skeleton; Bioactive-biomimetic material; Glycosaminoglycan;
   Alginate-based film; Environmentally sustainable formulation; Novel
   wound dressing
ID SULFATED POLYSACCHARIDES; ANTIOXIDANT PROPERTIES; MONOPHYLETIC ORIGIN;
   BETA-CYCLODEXTRIN; WOUND DRESSINGS; HYALURONIC-ACID; CELL-ADHESION;
   CHITOSAN; TISSUE; FILMS
AB The growing interest in the use of recyclable and biodegradable natural materials has become a relevant topic in pharmaceutics. In this work, we suggest the use and valorization of natural homy skeleton of marine sponges (Porifera, Dictyoceratida) as bio-based dressing for topical drug delivery. Biomaterial characterization focusing on morpho-functional traits, swelling behavior, fluid uptake performances, glycosaminoglycans content and composition andmicrobiological quality assessment was carried out to investigate the collagenic skeletonproperties. After grinding and sieving processes, L-cysteine hydrochloride-loaded formulations were designed in form of powder or polymeric film by testing various drug concentrations and different drying parameters. Drug content SEM analyses and in vitro permeation studies were performed to test the suitability of skeleton-based formulations. To this respect, drying time and temperature are key parameters for skeleton-mediated drug crystallization. Consequently, this behavior seems to influence drug loading and permeation profiles of formulations. The high percentages of drug are found after absorption into sponge powder and in vitro permeation studies demonstrate that cysteine is released more slowly than the pure drug within 1 h. Such a system is attractive because it combines the known healing properties of cysteine with the advantageous potentials of the collagen/proteoglycan network, which can act as biocompatible carrier able to absorb the excess of the wound exudate while releasing the drug. Furthermore, due to its glycosaminoglycans content, natural sponge skeletal scaffold might act as bioactive-biomimetic carrier regulating the wound healing processes. (C) 2016 Published by Elsevier B.V.
RI Giunchedi, Paolo/G-2750-2017
OI Gavini, Elisabetta/0000-0002-0499-9419; Rassu,
   Giovanna/0000-0001-6268-8179; Giunchedi, Paolo/0000-0002-2471-1355
TC 5
Z9 5
SN 0928-4931
EI 1873-0191
PD JAN 1
PY 2017
VL 70
BP 710
EP 720
DI 10.1016/j.msec.2016.09.041
PN 1
SC Materials Science
UT WOS:000388046900083
PM 27770946
ER

PT J
AU Brind'Amour, A
   Rochet, MJ
   Ordines, F
   Hosack, GR
   Berthele, O
   Merigot, B
   Carbonara, P
   Follesa, MC
   Jadaud, A
   Lefkaditou, E
   Maiorano, P
   Peristeraki, P
   Mannini, A
   Rabiller, M
   Spedicato, MT
   Tserpes, G
   Trenkel, VM
AF Brind'Amour, Anik
   Rochet, Marie-Joelle
   Ordines, Francesc
   Hosack, Geoffrey R.
   Berthele, Olivier
   Merigot, Bastien
   Carbonara, Pierluigi
   Follesa, Maria Cristina
   Jadaud, Angelique
   Lefkaditou, Evgenia
   Maiorano, Porzia
   Peristeraki, Panagiota
   Mannini, Alessandro
   Rabiller, Manuella
   Spedicato, Maria Teresa
   Tserpes, George
   Trenkel, Verena M.
TI Environmental drivers explain regional variation of changes in fish and
   invertebrate functional groups across the Mediterranean Sea from 1994 to
   2012
SO MARINE ECOLOGY PROGRESS SERIES
DT Article
DE Morphological traits; Community models; Functional network; Functional
   groups; Mediterranean Sea; Temporal trends; Fish; Shellfish
ID DEMERSAL FISH; CELTIC SEA; CONTINENTAL-SHELF; TROPHIC STRUCTURE;
   REGRESSION TREES; ECOSYSTEM MODELS; FEEDING GUILDS; BODY-SIZE; FOOD
   WEBS; TRAITS
AB Functional groups are sets of species that play a similar role in a food web. We defined functional groups of fish species based on their morphological characteristics, while using expert knowledge for invertebrates. We measured 9 morphological traits of 72 fish species, and carried out multivariate analyses to assign fish species to functional groups. The analysis identified 9 trait-based fish functional groups to which were added 3 expert-based invertebrate functional groups. The habitat (position in the water column) and potential diet of each group were identified from the literature. Using the MEDITS bottom trawl survey data collected at 10 to 800 m depth, we calculated relative change in the 12 fish and invertebrate functional group biomasses for 12 Mediterranean areas over the period 1994 to 2012. Multiple regression trees identified 4 regions with similar changes: (1) the Adriatic and the Ionian Sea; (2) the Tyrrhenian Sea and the Strait of Sicily; (3) the Balearic Islands and other enclosed areas such as the Gulf of Lions and Aegean Sea; and (4) the Ligurian Sea and Sardinia. The biomass of all functional groups increased or remained stable in the first 2 regions, while around half the functional group biomasses decreased in the other 2 regions. These regional differences in functional group biomass changes were mainly associated with regional variations in the time trends of bottom water temperature (37%), bottom water dissolved oxygen (23%) and mean catch levels (9%). This study contributes to the EU Marine Strategy Framework Directive by pro posing food web indicators based on morphologically and habitat defined functional groups.
RI Hosack, Geoffrey/E-8566-2010; Merigot, Bastien/H-7754-2018
OI Hosack, Geoffrey/0000-0002-6462-6817; Merigot,
   Bastien/0000-0001-5264-4324; Lefkaditou, Evgenia/0000-0002-7868-5375;
   Ordines, F. (Francesc)/0000-0002-2456-2214; Brind'Amour,
   Anik/0000-0003-4072-2588; Trenkel, Verena/0000-0001-7869-002X;
   Carbonara, Pierluigi/0000-0002-2529-2535
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0171-8630
EI 1616-1599
PD DEC 29
PY 2016
VL 562
BP 19
EP 35
DI 10.3354/meps11912
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology;
   Oceanography
UT WOS:000394183600002
ER

PT J
AU Rodriguez, S
   Martin, AP
   Sousa-Pinto, I
   Arenas, F
AF Rodriguez, Sonia
   Martin, Airam Prieto
   Sousa-Pinto, Isabel
   Arenas, Francisco
TI Biodiversity effects on macroalgal productivity: exploring the roles of
   richness, evenness and species traits
SO MARINE ECOLOGY PROGRESS SERIES
DT Article
DE Biodiversity; Ecosystem functioning; Species number; Evenness;
   Functional diversity; Functional identity; Seaweeds
ID FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; MARINE BIODIVERSITY; ECOSYSTEM FUNCTION; CURRENT
   KNOWLEDGE; PLANT DIVERSITY; COMMUNITIES; FACILITATION; ASSEMBLAGES;
   IDENTITY; STABILITY
AB In the last 2 decades, concerns regarding the effects of global loss of diversity have prompted considerable research on the functional consequences of biodiversity. In this context, a new perception of biodiversity as a major regulator of the functioning of ecosystems has emerged. The concept of biodiversity has a wide meaning and includes not only the number of species, but also the number of traits, relative species and trait abundances, etc. Understanding how these different components of biodiversity influence the functioning of communities is required in order to improve our ability to project the future consequences of the current rate of diversity loss. We used a short term manipulative experiment to disentangle the effects of species numbers, species traits (identity) and species relative abundance (evenness) on the primary productivity rates of intertidal macroalgal assemblages. We also examined the ability of functional identity and diversity indices to predict the magnitude of primary productivity and overyielding. Results suggested that the intense identity effects, derived from species traits, drove the response of the experimental assemblages. The relevance of species traits was confirmed by the significant effects of the community-level functional identity descriptors on the functioning of the assemblages. Also, weak but consistently positive effects were detected for evenness. Finally, the interaction between species richness and evenness suggested that the negative effect of high dominance by single species (i.e. low evenness) was more intense on those assemblages with reduced species richness. Thus, understanding potential interactions between richness, evenness and functional identity among other biodiversity components is critical to identify present and project future consequences of anthropogenic disturbances.
RI Scientific Productivity, CIIMAR/N-6498-2017; Scientific output,
   CIIMAR/E-5122-2012; Arenas, Francisco/M-7095-2015
OI Scientific Productivity, CIIMAR/0000-0002-3703-4402; Scientific output,
   CIIMAR/0000-0001-6270-2153; Arenas, Francisco/0000-0001-6925-3805; Sousa
   Pinto, Isabel/0000-0002-9231-0553
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0171-8630
EI 1616-1599
PD DEC 29
PY 2016
VL 562
BP 79
EP 91
DI 10.3354/meps11948
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology;
   Oceanography
UT WOS:000394183600006
ER

PT J
AU D'agata, S
   Vigliola, L
   Graham, NAJ
   Wantiez, L
   Parravicini, V
   Villeger, S
   Gerard, MT
   Frolla, P
   Friedlander, AM
   Kulbicki, M
   Mouillot, D
AF D'agata, Stephanie
   Vigliola, Laurent
   Graham, Nicholas A. J.
   Wantiez, Laurent
   Parravicini, Valeriano
   Villeger, Sebastien
   Gerard Mou-Tham
   Frolla, Philippe
   Friedlander, Alan M.
   Kulbicki, Michel
   Mouillot, David
TI Unexpected high vulnerability of functions in wilderness areas: evidence
   from coral reef fishes
SO PROCEEDINGS OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY B-BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES
DT Article
DE coral reef fish; wilderness areas; redundancy; baseline functional
   vulnerability
ID MARINE PROTECTED AREAS; BIODIVERSITY LOSS; CLIMATE-CHANGE; ECOSYSTEM
   MULTIFUNCTIONALITY; TROPHIC LEVELS; NEW-CALEDONIA; DIVERSITY;
   ASSEMBLAGES; REVEALS; CONSERVATION
AB High species richness is thought to support the delivery of multiple ecosystem functions and services under changing environments. Yet, some species might performunique functional roles while others are redundant. Thus, the benefits of high species richness in maintaining ecosystem functioning are uncertain if functions have little redundancy, potentially leading to high vulnerability of functions. We studied the natural propensity of assemblages to be functionally buffered against loss prior to fishing activities, using functional trait combinations, in coral reef fish assemblages across unfished wilderness areas of the Indo-Pacific: Chagos Archipelago, New Caledonia and French Polynesia. Fish functional diversity in these wilderness areas is highly vulnerable to fishing, explained by species-and abundance-based redundancy packed into a small combination of traits, leaving most other trait combinations (60%) sensitive to fishing, with no redundancy. Functional vulnerability peaks for mobile and sedentary top predators, and large species in general. Functional vulnerability decreases for certain functional entities in New Caledonia, where overall functional redundancy was higher. Uncovering these baseline patterns of functional vulnerability can offer early warning signals of the damaging effects from fishing, and may serve as baselines to guide precautionary and even proactive conservation actions.
RI Villeger, Sebastien/C-6272-2011; Graham, Nicholas/C-8360-2014; Wantiez,
   Laurent/L-3343-2013; Vigliola, Laurent/J-7107-2016
OI Villeger, Sebastien/0000-0002-2362-7178; Graham,
   Nicholas/0000-0002-0304-7467; Wantiez, Laurent/0000-0001-5024-2057;
   Vigliola, Laurent/0000-0003-4715-7470; Parravicini,
   Valeriano/0000-0002-3408-1625; D'agata, Stephanie/0000-0001-6941-8489
TC 8
Z9 8
SN 0962-8452
EI 1471-2954
PD DEC 14
PY 2016
VL 283
IS 1844
AR 20160128
DI 10.1098/rspb.2016.0128
SC Life Sciences & Biomedicine - Other Topics; Environmental Sciences &
   Ecology; Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000390404200002
ER

PT J
AU Runcie, DE
   Dorey, N
   Garfield, DA
   Stumpp, M
   Dupont, S
   Wray, GA
AF Runcie, Daniel E.
   Dorey, Narimane
   Garfield, David A.
   Stumpp, Meike
   Dupont, Sam
   Wray, Gregory A.
TI Genomic Characterization of the Evolutionary Potential of the Sea Urchin
   Strongylocentrotus droebachiensis Facing Ocean Acidification
SO GENOME BIOLOGY AND EVOLUTION
DT Article
DE System genetics; climate change; genetic variation; plasticity; RNAseq;
   gene set variation analysis
ID DIFFERENTIAL EXPRESSION ANALYSIS; GENE-EXPRESSION; CLIMATE-CHANGE;
   RNA-SEQ; SEAWATER ACIDIFICATION; CO2-DRIVEN ACIDIFICATION; SYSTEMS
   GENETICS; IMMUNE-RESPONSE; COMPLEX TRAITS; PURPURATUS
AB Ocean acidification (OA) is increasing due to anthropogenic CO2 emissions and poses a threat to marine species and communities worldwide. To better project the effects of acidification on organisms' health and persistence, an understanding is needed of the 1) mechanisms underlying developmental and physiological tolerance and 2) potential populations have for rapid evolutionary adaptation. This is especially challenging in nonmodel species where targeted assays of metabolism and stress physiology may not be available or economical for large-scale assessments of genetic constraints. We used mRNA sequencing and a quantitative genetics breeding design to study mechanisms underlying genetic variability and tolerance to decreased seawater pH (-0.4 pH units) in larvae of the sea urchin Strongylocentrotus droebachiensis. We used a gene ontology-based approach to integrate expression profiles into indirect measures of cellular and biochemical traits underlying variation in larval performance (i.e., growth rates). Molecular responses to OA were complex, involving changes to several functions such as growth rates, cell division, metabolism, and immune activities. Surprisingly, the magnitude of pH effects on molecular traits tended to be small relative to variation attributable to segregating functional genetic variation in this species. We discuss how the application of transcriptomics and quantitative genetics approaches across diverse species can enrich our understanding of the biological impacts of climate change.
OI Dorey, Narimane/0000-0003-2814-1406; Runcie, Daniel/0000-0002-3008-9312
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 1759-6653
PD DEC
PY 2016
VL 8
IS 12
BP 3672
EP 3684
DI 10.1093/gbe/evw272
SC Evolutionary Biology; Genetics & Heredity
UT WOS:000395813500009
PM 28082601
ER

PT J
AU Houssaye, A
   Sander, PM
   Klein, N
AF Houssaye, Alexandra
   Sander, P. Martin
   Klein, Nicole
TI Adaptive Patterns in Aquatic Amniote Bone Microanatomy-More Complex than
   Previously Thought
SO INTEGRATIVE AND COMPARATIVE BIOLOGY
DT Article; Proceedings Paper
CT Symposium on Tapping the Power of Crustacean Transcriptomics to Address
   Grand Challenges in Comparative Biology at the Annual Meeting of the
   Society-for-Integrative-and-Comparative-Biology
CY JAN 03-07, 2016
CL Portland, OR
ID PLATYPUS ORNITHORHYNCHUS-ANATINUS; PACHYVARANUS-CRASSISPONDYLUS
   ARAMBOURG; MONTE SAN GIORGIO; LIFE-STYLE; ALLIGATOR-MISSISSIPPIENSIS;
   VERTEBRAL MICROANATOMY; HUMERAL MICROANATOMY; POSTCRANIAL SKELETON;
   LUTRA-LUTRA; HISTOLOGY
AB Numerous amniote groups adapted to an aquatic life. This change of habitat naturally led to numerous convergences. The various adaptive traits vary depending on the degree of adaptation to an aquatic life, notably between shallow water taxa still able to occasionally locomote on land and open-marine forms totally independent from the terrestrial environment, but also between surface swimmers and deep divers. As a consequence, despite convergences, there is a high diversity within aquatic amniotes in e.g., shape, size, physiology, swimming mode. Bone microanatomy is considered to be strongly associated with bone biomechanics and is thus a powerful tool to understand bone adaptation to functional constraints and to make functional inferences on extinct taxa. Two opposing major microanatomical specializations have been described in aquatic amniotes, referred to as bone mass increase and a spongious organization, respectively. They are assumed to be essentially linked with the hydrostatic or hydrodynamic control of buoyancy and body trim and with swimming abilities and velocity. However, between extremes in these specializations, a wide range of intermediary patterns occurs. The present study provides a state-of-the-art review of these inner bone adaptations in semi-aquatic and aquatic amniotes. The analysis of the various microanatomical patterns observed in long bones, vertebrae, and ribs of a large sample of (semi-) aquatic extant and extinct amniotes reveals the wide diversity in microanatomical patterns and the variation in combination of these different patterns within a single skeleton. This enables us to discuss the link between microanatomical features and habitat, swimming abilities, and thus functional requirements in the context of amniote adaptation to an aquatic lifestyle.
TC 12
Z9 12
SN 1540-7063
EI 1557-7023
PD DEC
PY 2016
VL 56
IS 6
BP 1349
EP 1369
DI 10.1093/icb/icw120
SC Zoology
UT WOS:000395818000024
PM 27794536
ER

PT J
AU Brun, P
   Payne, MR
   Kiorboe, T
AF Brun, Philipp
   Payne, Mark R.
   Kiorboe, Thomas
TI Trait biogeography of marine copepods - an analysis across scales
SO ECOLOGY LETTERS
DT Article
DE Body size; copepods; feeding mode; global; integrated nested Laplace
   approximations; marine zooplankton; myelination; offspring size; Shannon
   size diversity; Trait biogeography
ID SIZE STRUCTURE; ZOOPLANKTON; MODELS; GROWTH; COMMUNITIES; TEMPERATURE;
   ECOSYSTEMS; MECHANISMS; STRATEGIES; DIVERSITY
AB Functional traits, rather than taxonomic identity, determine the fitness of individuals in their environment: traits of marine organisms are therefore expected to vary across the global ocean as a function of the environment. Here, we quantify such spatial and seasonal variations based on extensive empirical data and present the first global biogeography of key traits (body size, feeding mode, relative offspring size and myelination) for pelagic copepods, the major group of marine zooplankton. We identify strong patterns with latitude, season and between ocean basins that are partially (c. 50%) explained by key environmental drivers. Body size, for example decreases with temperature, confirming the temperature-size rule, but surprisingly also with productivity, possibly driven by food-chain length and size-selective predation. Patterns unrelated to environmental predictors may originate from phylogenetic clustering. Our maps can be used as a test-bed for trait-based mechanistic models and to inspire next-generation biogeochemical models.
RI Payne, Mark/C-6844-2008
OI Payne, Mark/0000-0001-5795-2481; Brun, Philipp/0000-0002-2750-9793
TC 10
Z9 10
SN 1461-023X
EI 1461-0248
PD DEC
PY 2016
VL 19
IS 12
BP 1403
EP 1413
DI 10.1111/ele.12688
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000390025100002
PM 27726281
ER

PT J
AU Kimball, S
   Funk, JL
   Spasojevic, MJ
   Suding, KN
   Parker, S
   Goulden, ML
AF Kimball, Sarah
   Funk, Jennifer L.
   Spasojevic, Marko J.
   Suding, Katharine N.
   Parker, Scot
   Goulden, Michael L.
TI Can functional traits predict plant community response to global change?
SO ECOSPHERE
DT Article
DE California grassland; coastal sage scrub; community response to global
   change; community-weighted means; functional diversity; invasive
   grasses; nitrogen manipulation; rainfall manipulation
ID COASTAL SAGE SCRUB; CLIMATE-CHANGE; SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA; SPECIES
   INTERACTIONS; NITROGEN DEPOSITION; ECONOMICS SPECTRUM; WATER
   AVAILABILITY; ALTERED WATER; DIVERSITY; GRASSLAND
AB One primary goal at the intersection of community ecology and global change biology is to identify functional traits that are useful for predicting plant community response to global change. We used observations of community composition from a long-term field experiment in two adjacent plant communities (grassland and coastal sage shrub) to investigate how nine key plant functional traits were related to altered water and nitrogen availability following fire. We asked whether the functional responses of species found in more than one community type were context dependent and whether community-weighted mean and functional diversity were significantly altered by water and nitrogen input. Our results suggest varying degrees of context dependency. We found that plants with high leaf nitrogen concentration (specifically nitrogen fixers), shallow roots, and low leaf mass per unit area and plant-level transpiration were similarly negatively influenced by added nitrogen across community types. In contrast, responses to water manipulations exhibited greater context dependency; plants with high water-use efficiency, lower plant-level transpiration rates, and shallower roots were negatively impacted by simulated drought in the shrub-dominated community, but there was no significant relationship between these traits and changes in water inputs in the grassland community. Similarly, we found context dependency in community-wide trait responses to global change. Functional diversity tended to be higher in plots with reduced water as compared to those with added water in grassland, while the opposite trend was observed in coastal sage scrub. Our results indicate that some traits are strong predictors of species and community response to altered water and nitrogen availability, but the magnitude and direction of the response may be modulated by the abiotic and biotic context.
RI Goulden, Michael/B-9934-2008; Suding, Katharine/O-6290-2017
OI Suding, Katharine/0000-0002-5357-0176
TC 7
Z9 8
SN 2150-8925
PD DEC
PY 2016
VL 7
IS 12
AR e01602
DI 10.1002/ecs2.1602
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000390136700013
ER

PT J
AU Edwards, KF
AF Edwards, Kyle F.
TI Community trait structure in phytoplankton: seasonal dynamics from a
   method for sparse trait data
SO ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE diversity; English Channel; fourth-corner problem; functional
   biogeography; ocean; species distribution model; trait-based model;
   uptake kinetics
ID WESTERN ENGLISH-CHANNEL; FUNCTIONAL TRAITS; PLANT TRAITS; CELL-SIZE;
   ECOSYSTEM; DIVERSITY; OCEAN; BIOGEOGRAPHY; GROWTH; TEMPERATURE
AB The distribution of functional traits in communities, and how trait distributions shift over time and space, is critical information for understanding community structure, the maintenance of diversity, and community effects on ecosystem function. It is often the case that traits tightly linked to ecological performance, such as physiological capacities, are laborious to measure and largely unknown for speciose communities; however, these traits are particularly important for unraveling the mechanistic basis of community structure. Here I develop a method combining sparse trait data with a statistical niche model to infer trait distributions for phytoplankton communities and how they vary over 10 yr in the western English Channel. I find that community-average nitrate affinity, light-limited growth rate, and maximum growth rate all show major seasonal patterns, reflecting alternate limitation by light vs. nitrogen. Trait diversity exhibits a variety of patterns distinct from community trait means, which suggests complex regulation of functional diversity. Patterns such as these are important for predicting how ocean ecosystems will respond to global change, and for developing trait-based models of emergent community structure. The statistical approach used here could be applied to any kind of organism, if it exhibits strong relationships between traits and statistical niche estimates.
TC 5
Z9 5
SN 0012-9658
EI 1939-9170
PD DEC
PY 2016
VL 97
IS 12
BP 3441
EP 3451
DI 10.1002/ecy.1581
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000389444800021
PM 27911997
ER

PT J
AU Alvarez-Noriega, M
   Baird, AH
   Dornelas, M
   Madin, JS
   Cumbo, VR
   Connolly, SR
AF Alvarez-Noriega, Mariana
   Baird, Andrew H.
   Dornelas, Maria
   Madin, Joshua S.
   Cumbo, Vivian R.
   Connolly, Sean R.
TI Fecundity and the demographic strategies of coral morphologies
SO ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE demographic strategies; fecundity; morphology; reef coral; tradeoff
ID COLONIAL MARINE INVERTEBRATE; TRAIT-BASED APPROACH; GREAT-BARRIER-REEF;
   FUNCTIONAL TRAITS; COMMUNITY STRUCTURE; TAXONOMIC VARIATION; TROPICAL
   FORESTS; TRADE-OFFS; SEED SIZE; GROWTH
AB Understanding species differences in demographic strategies is a fundamental goal of ecology. In scleractinian corals, colony morphology is tightly linked with many demographic traits, such as size-specific growth and morality. Here we test how well morphology predicts the colony size-fecundity relationship in eight species of broadcast-spawning corals. Variation in colony fecundity is greater among morphologies than between species with a similar morphology, demonstrating that colony morphology can be used as a quantitative proxy for demographic strategies. Additionally, we examine the relationship between size-specific colony fecundity and mechanical vulnerability (i.e., vulnerability to colony dislodgment). Interestingly, the relationship between size-specific fecundity and mechanical vulnerability varied among morphologies. For tabular species, the most fecund colonies are the most mechanically vulnerable, while the opposite is true for massive species. For corymbose and digitate colonies, mechanical vulnerability remains relatively constant as fecundity increases. These results reveal strong differences in the demographic tradeoffs among species of different morphologies. Using colony morphology as a quantitative proxy for demographic strategies can help predict coral community dynamics and responses to anthropogenic change.
OI Connolly, Sean/0000-0003-1537-0859; Cumbo, Vivian/0000-0001-5757-8899;
   Madin, Joshua/0000-0002-5005-6227
TC 9
Z9 9
SN 0012-9658
EI 1939-9170
PD DEC
PY 2016
VL 97
IS 12
BP 3485
EP 3493
DI 10.1002/ecy.1588
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000389444800025
PM 27912010
ER

PT J
AU Caro-Borrero, A
   Carmona-Jimenez, J
AF Caro-Borrero, A.
   Carmona-Jimenez, J.
TI Associations Between Macroinvertebrates and Paralemanea mexicana, an
   Endemic Freshwater Red Alga from a Mountain River in Central Mexico
SO NEOTROPICAL ENTOMOLOGY
DT Article
DE Mountain river; macroinvertebrate functional groups; red alga
   morphology; ecological interaction
ID RHODOPHYTA; MACROPHYTE; STREAMS; CHIRONOMIDAE; DIPTERA
AB Macrophytes are common inhabitants of lotic environments and, depending on their morphological traits, possess adaptations that provide shelter to aquatic invertebrates against strong river flow and predators. They may also be used as a food source by macroinvertebrates. The main goal of this study was to determine the relationship between the red alga Paralemanea mexicana and its role as a shelter and/or food source for lotic macroinvertebrates. We also conducted research on the role of microhabitat and morphological variations of the alga in determining macroinvertebrate taxon abundance, diversity, and functional group composition in a high-current velocity river. Results showed that changes in cover and morphology of P. mexicana were mostly correlated with river current velocity, irradiance, and seasonal variation. In turn, these were related to changes in abundance and diversity of the associated macroinvertebrate community. In addition, six macroinvertebrate functional feeding groups were evaluated for associations with the red alga: filtering and gathering collectors, piercers, scrapers, herbivore shredders, and predators. The results showed that the Trichoptera Hydroptilidae genera Ochrotrichia and Metrichia use P. mexicana as a food source and case-building material. The Trichoptera Glossosomatidae Mortoniella uses the alga as a substrate. The biotic interactions between P. mexicana and associated macroinvertebrates reveal the importance of macrophytes as purveyors of substrate, as food and shelter for macroinvertebrates, and also as promoters of macroinvertebrate community diversity. In addition, it was shown that macroinvertebrate herbivory likely facilitates vegetative propagation of the red alga through increased release and germination of carpospores and new gametophytes.
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 1519-566X
EI 1678-8052
PD DEC
PY 2016
VL 45
IS 6
BP 665
EP 674
DI 10.1007/s13744-016-0420-z
SC Entomology
UT WOS:000389000400007
PM 27394719
ER

PT J
AU Canedo-Arguelles, M
   Bogan, MT
   Lytle, DA
   Prat, N
AF Canedo-Arguelles, Miguel
   Bogan, Michael T.
   Lytle, David A.
   Prat, Narcis
TI Are Chironomidae (Diptera) good indicators of water scarcity? Dryland
   streams as a case study
SO ECOLOGICAL INDICATORS
DT Article
DE Water scarcity; Chironomidae; Ecological traits; Drought resistance;
   Dryland streams
ID WESTERN UNITED-STATES; TEMPORARY STREAMS; LEAF-LITTER; MACROINVERTEBRATE
   COMMUNITY; INVERTEBRATE COMMUNITIES; ASSEMBLAGE COMPOSITION;
   INTERMITTENT-STREAM; RIPARIAN VEGETATION; FLOW INTERMITTENCY; PERENNIAL
   STREAMS
AB Water scarcity is becoming one of the greatest challenges that human societies will face during this century. Monitoring water availability is expensive and technically challenging. In this regard, biological communities (e.g. aquatic insects) offer a cost-effective alternative, since they integrate temporal and spatial hydrological variability.
   Here we explore the potential of Chironomidae (Diptera), which have been usually neglected due to their complex taxonomy, as indicators of both local habitat condition and water scarcity. The study took place in 28 sites across seven dryland streams distributed within a 400 km(2) section of the Upper San Pedro River basin, southeastern Arizona. The selected streams covered a wide range of hydrological variability, which was continuously measured through the deployment of 15 electrical resistance (ER) sensors. Chironomidae taxa with no drought-resistance strategies were rarely found in streams that experienced frequent drying events (i.e. intermittent and ephemeral streams), suggesting that droughts have the potential to reduce species richness due to local extinctions of drought-intolerant taxa. Intermittent and ephemeral streams registered low canopy cover and a significantly higher abundance of scrapers (which mainly feed on algae) and shredders (feeding on poorly decomposed coarse organic material). This suggests that structural changes associated to drought (e.g. reduced canopy cover and decomposition rates) might lead to changes in the functional composition of the Chironomidae assemblages. We conclude that Chironomidae species can be used as indicators of hydrological variability and the impacts of drought on streams in the absence of flow gauges. (C) 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
RI Canedo-Arguelles, Miguel/L-6365-2014
OI Canedo-Arguelles, Miguel/0000-0003-3864-7451
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 1470-160X
EI 1872-7034
PD DEC
PY 2016
VL 71
BP 155
EP 162
DI 10.1016/j.ecolind.2016.07.002
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000388157900016
ER

PT J
AU Pilo, D
   Ben-Hamadou, R
   Pereira, F
   Carrico, A
   Pereira, P
   Corzo, A
   Gaspar, MB
   Carvalho, S
AF Pilo, D.
   Ben-Hamadou, R.
   Pereira, F.
   Carrico, A.
   Pereira, P.
   Corzo, A.
   Gaspar, M. B.
   Carvalho, S.
TI How functional traits of estuarine macrobenthic assemblages respond to
   metal contamination?
SO ECOLOGICAL INDICATORS
DT Article
DE Macrobenthic communities; Estuaries; Biological trait analysis; Metals;
   RLQ/Fourth-corner combined analysis; Functional structure
ID MARINE-BIOTIC-INDEX; STREAM INVERTEBRATE COMMUNITIES; SUBTIDAL BENTHIC
   COMMUNITIES; ECOLOGICAL QUALITY STATUS; SALT-MARSH AREAS; BIOLOGICAL
   TRAITS; SPECIES TRAITS; TAGUS ESTUARY; ENVIRONMENT RELATIONSHIPS;
   MERCURY CONTAMINATION
AB The effects of metal contamination on estuarine macrobenthic communities were investigated using the Biological Traits Analysis (BTA). The study was carried out in the Tagus estuary (western Portugal). Samples of macrobenthic communities and associated environmental variables were taken in four surveys (September 2012, and February, May and October 2013) across the contamination gradient from three main zones: a slightly contaminated, a moderately contaminated and a highly contaminated zone. Functional traits for the most abundant species were assigned using seven categories based on "Feeding mode", "Life span", "Body size", "Motility", "Position in sediments", "Larval type" and "AMBI ecological group". To investigate whether the macroinvertebrate community structure was associated with the environmental parameters and biological traits an integrative multivariate analysis, combining the RLQ analysis and the fourth-corner method, was applied. Within this analysis, human-induced estuarine variables (metals) were rendered independent from natural ones (sediment fine particles) through partial correlations. Following this approach, it was possible to decouple the effects of two typically highly correlated environmental descriptors with different origins. Overall, the study identified significant relationships between sediment environmental descriptors and the functional traits of macrobenthic communities. Further, RLQ/Fourth-corner combined analysis successfully isolated the traits and corresponding species that were most correlated with the measured concentration of trace metals in sediments, supporting the knowledge that benthic organisms exhibit distinct responses to different levels of disturbance. A shift in species dominance occurred along the contamination gradient with epifaunal tolerant species with very small size, long life span, and crawling motility dominating the highest contaminated area. This area was also related with surface deposit-feeder species. The most representative species associated with this area was the gastropod Peringia ulvae. Less contaminated sites revealed large-sized specimens, carnivores and swimmers, mainly represented by the polychaete Nephtys hombergii. This finding is consistent with other studies addressing different kinds of disturbance, where a shift in dominance from carnivore/predators, long-lived and large animals to the predominance of small-size, short-lived and deposit-feeders has been observed across increasing gradients of disturbance. Our results reinforce the importance of macrobenthic functional traits analysis to assess human disturbances driven impacts in multi-stressed estuarine ecosystems. By analysing the environmental variables with different origins independently, we were able to draw conclusions about the effects of human pressures (metals) on macrobenthic traits. Such distinction can be particularly useful to isolate different environmental descriptors and assess their effects on functional diversity, making the current approach promising in evaluation the ecological effects of anthropogenic stressors in estuarine areas. (C) 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
RI Gaspar, Miguel/F-5398-2011; Pereira, Patricia/G-3117-2014; Algarve,
   CCMAR/C-2603-2018
OI Gaspar, Miguel/0000-0001-9245-8518; Pereira,
   Patricia/0000-0001-7613-0635; Carrico, Ana/0000-0003-4665-8388; Pilo,
   David/0000-0002-1810-7135; Corzo Rodriguez, Alfonso/0000-0003-3718-941X;
   Ben-Hamadou, Radhouan/0000-0003-2686-5822
TC 6
Z9 6
SN 1470-160X
EI 1872-7034
PD DEC
PY 2016
VL 71
BP 645
EP 659
DI 10.1016/j.ecolind.2016.07.019
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000388157900065
ER

PT J
AU Nichols, KM
   Kozfkay, CC
   Narum, SR
AF Nichols, Krista M.
   Kozfkay, Christine C.
   Narum, Shawn R.
TI Genomic signatures among Oncorhynchus nerka ecotypes to inform
   conservation and management of endangered Sockeye Salmon
SO EVOLUTIONARY APPLICATIONS
DT Article
DE migration; natural selection; random forest; residency
ID EFFECTIVE POPULATION-SIZE; MIGRATION-RELATED TRAITS; STEELHEAD TROUT;
   RANDOM FOREST; GENETIC-DIVERGENCE; RE-IMPLEMENTATION; WIDE ASSOCIATION;
   KOKANEE SALMON; PACIFIC SALMON; RIVER
AB Conservation of life history variation is an important consideration for many species with trade-offs in migratory characteristics. Many salmonid species exhibit both resident and migratory strategies that capitalize on benefits in freshwater and marine environments. In this study, we investigated genomic signatures for migratory life history in collections of resident and anadromous Oncorhynchus nerka (Kokanee and Sockeye Salmon, respectively) from two lake systems, using similar to 2,600 SNPs from restriction-site-associated DNA sequencing (RAD-seq). Differing demographic histories were evident in the two systems where one pair was significantly differentiated (Redfish Lake, F-ST=0.091 [95% confidence interval: 0.087 to 0.095]) but the other pair was not (Alturas Lake, F-ST=-0.007 [-0.008 to -0.006]). Outlier and association analyses identified several candidate markers in each population pair, but there was limited evidence for parallel signatures of genomic variation associated with migration. Despite lack of evidence for consistent markers associated with migratory life history in this species, candidate markers were mapped to functional genes and provide evidence for adaptive genetic variation within each lake system. Life history variation has been maintained in these nearly extirpated populations of O. nerka, and conservation efforts to preserve this diversity are important for long-term resiliency of this species.
TC 12
Z9 12
SN 1752-4571
PD DEC
PY 2016
VL 9
IS 10
BP 1285
EP 1300
DI 10.1111/eva.12412
SC Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000387763700007
PM 27877206
ER

PT J
AU Milesi, SV
   Doledec, S
   Melo, AS
AF Milesi, Silvia V.
   Doledec, Sylvain
   Melo, Adriano S.
TI Substrate heterogeneity influences the trait composition of stream
   insect communities: an experimental in situ study
SO FRESHWATER SCIENCE
DT Article
DE benthic invertebrate traits; substrate heterogeneity; functional
   richness; functional diversity
ID THEORETICAL HABITAT TEMPLETS; FUNCTIONAL FEEDING GROUPS; UPPER RHONE
   RIVER; SPECIES TRAITS; NEOTROPICAL STREAMS; AQUATIC INSECTS;
   MACROINVERTEBRATE COMMUNITIES; INVERTEBRATE COMMUNITIES; SPATIAL
   HETEROGENEITY; ENVIRONMENTAL-FACTORS
AB Local distribution of stream insects is influenced by abiotic factors, such as substrate heterogeneity and amount of organic matter. We evaluated the influence of substrate heterogeneity on the functional structure and diversity of stream macroinvertebrate communities based on 4 traits: feeding habits, body size, body shape, and attachment to substrate. Heterogeneous substrate supported communities with higher functional diversity and richness than did homogeneous substrate. In addition, communities on heterogeneous substrate had more predators, shredders, filterer-collectors, and organisms with a large body size than did homogeneous substrate. In contrast, communities on homogeneous substrate had predominantly small organisms, case-builders, and scrapers. Our results suggest that in natural habitats, substrate heterogeneity selects specific combinations of traits especially related to size and feeding habit, which have strong implications for stream ecosystem functioning. As a result, one may anticipate that homogenization of stream bottom substrate associated with human activities should result in a reduction or loss of important functions linked, e.g., to the processing of organic matter, which should greatly affect the stream ecosystem.
RI Melo, Adriano/D-6859-2013
TC 10
Z9 11
SN 2161-9549
EI 2161-9565
PD DEC
PY 2016
VL 35
IS 4
BP 1321
EP 1329
DI 10.1086/688706
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000388080700022
ER

PT J
AU Mondy, CP
   Munoz, I
   Doledec, S
AF Mondy, Cedric P.
   Munoz, Isabel
   Doledec, Sylvain
TI Life-history strategies constrain invertebrate community tolerance to
   multiple stressors: A case study in the Ebro basin
SO SCIENCE OF THE TOTAL ENVIRONMENT
DT Article
DE Aquatic invertebrates; Trait combinations; Habitat template; Boosted
   regression trees; Mediterranean streams; Water scarcity
ID STREAM MACROINVERTEBRATE COMMUNITIES; FRESH-WATER MACROINVERTEBRATES;
   LARGE EUROPEAN RIVERS; BIOLOGICAL TRAITS; SPECIES TRAITS; AQUATIC
   ECOSYSTEMS; HABITAT; SEDIMENT; ECOLOGY; TEMPLET
AB Context: Multiple stressors constitute a serious threat to aquatic ecosystems, particularly in the Mediterranean region where water scarcity is likely to interact with other anthropogenic stressors. Biological traits potentially allow the unravelling of the effects of multiple stressors. However, thus far, trait-based approaches have failed to fully deliver on their promise and still lack strong predictive power when multiple stressors are present.
   Goal: We aimed to quantify specific community tolerances against six anthropogenic stressors and investigate the responses of the underlying macroinvertebrate biological traits and their combinations.
   Methods: We built and calibrated boosted regression tree models to predict community tolerances using multiple biological traits with a priori hypotheses regarding their individual responses to specific stressors. We analysed the combinations of traits underlying community tolerance and the effect of trait association on this tolerance.
   Results: Our results validated the following three hypotheses: (i) the community tolerance models efficiently and robustly related trait combinations to stressor intensities and, to a lesser extent, to stressors related to the presence of dams and insecticides; (ii) the effects of traits on community tolerance not only depended on trait identity but also on the trait associations emerging at the community level from the co-occurrence of different traits in species; and (iii) the community tolerances and the underlying trait combinations were specific to the different stressors.
   Conclusion: This study takes a further step towards predictive tools in community ecology that consider combinations and associations of traits as the basis of stressor tolerance. Additionally, the community tolerance concept has potential application to help stream managers in the decision process regarding management options. (C) 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license.
OI Munoz, Isabel/0000-0001-8110-9435; Mondy, Cedric/0000-0003-2788-0936
TC 9
Z9 9
SN 0048-9697
EI 1879-1026
PD DEC 1
PY 2016
VL 572
BP 196
EP 206
DI 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.07.227
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000387807200021
PM 27498381
ER

PT J
AU Arenas-Sanchez, A
   Rico, A
   Vighi, M
AF Arenas-Sanchez, Alba
   Rico, Andreu
   Vighi, Marco
TI Effects of water scarcity and chemical pollution in aquatic ecosystems:
   State of the art
SO SCIENCE OF THE TOTAL ENVIRONMENT
DT Article
DE Contaminants; Temporary rivers; Multiple stressors; Ecotoxicology;
   Aquatic communities
ID FUNGICIDE TEBUCONAZOLE; MEDITERRANEAN RIVERS; COMMUNITY STRUCTURE;
   TEMPORARY STREAMS; RISK-ASSESSMENT; MACROINVERTEBRATE ASSEMBLAGES;
   BIOLOGICAL COMMUNITIES; MULTIPLE STRESSORS; SEASONAL-CHANGES;
   CLIMATE-CHANGE
AB Water scarcity is an expanding climate and human related condition, which drives and interacts with other stressors in freshwater ecosystems such as chemical pollution. In this study we provide an overview of the existing knowledge regarding the chemical fate, biological dynamics and the ecological risks of chemicals underwater scarcity conditions. We evaluated a total of 15 studies dealing with the combined effects of chemicals and water scarcity under laboratory conditions and in the field. The results of these studies have been elaborated in order to evaluate additive, synergistic or antagonistic responses of the studied endpoints. As a general rule, it can be concluded that, in situations of water scarcity, the impacts of extreme water fluctuations are much more relevant than those of an additional chemical stressor. Nevertheless, the presence of chemical pollution may result in exacerbated ecological risks in some particular cases. We conclude that further investigations on this topic would take advantage on the focus on some specific issues. Experimental (laboratory and model ecosystem) studies should be performed on different biota groups and life stages (diapausing eggs, immature stages), with particular attention to those including traits relevant for the adaptation to water scarcity. More knowledge on species adaptations and recovery capacity is essential to predict community responses to multiple stressors and to assess the community vulnerability. Field studies should be performed at different scales, particularly in lotic systems, in order to integrate different functional dynamics of the river ecosystem. Combining field monitoring and experimental studies would be the best option to reach more conclusive, causal relationships on the effects of co-occurring stressors. Contribution of these studies to develop ecological models and scenarios is also suggested as an improvement for the prospective aquatic risk assessment of chemicals in (semi-) arid areas. (C) 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
OI Rico, Andreu/0000-0002-1820-4218
TC 20
Z9 20
SN 0048-9697
EI 1879-1026
PD DEC 1
PY 2016
VL 572
BP 390
EP 403
DI 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.07.211
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000387807200040
PM 27513735
ER

PT J
AU Coleman, MA
   Ingleton, T
   Millar, RB
   Davies, PL
   Jordan, A
   Kelaher, BP
AF Coleman, Melinda A.
   Ingleton, Tim
   Millar, Russell B.
   Davies, Peter L.
   Jordan, Alan
   Kelaher, Brendan P.
TI Remotely sensed habitat variables are poor surrogates for functional
   traits of rocky reef fish assemblages
SO ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION
DT Article
DE conservation planning; fish; mapping; marine protected areas; reef;
   reserve; surrogate
ID CONTINENTAL-SHELF; CONSERVATION; BIODIVERSITY; DIVERSITY; COMMUNITIES;
   AUSTRALIA; REVEALS; SYDNEY
AB Conservation planning often relies on measures such as species richness and abundance to prioritize areas for protection. Nonetheless, alternative metrics such as functional traits have recently been shown to be useful complementary measures for detecting biological change. Timely conservation planning often precludes the collection of such detailed biological data relying instead on remotely-sensed habitat mapping as a surrogate for diversity. While there is evidence that habitat maps may predict taxonomic species richness and diversity in some coastal ecosystems, it is unknown whether similar strong relationships exist for functional traits and functional multimetrics. We compared the performance of physical habitat structural complexity obtained from high definition swath mapping in explaining variation in traditional taxonomic metrics as well as functional traits (e.g., maximum length, trophic level, gregariousness) and functional multimetrics (e.g., functional richness, dispersion) of fish assemblages. Reef complexity measures were good surrogates for fish species richness and abundance but not for functional traits or multimetrics, except functional richness at the scale of 1 m. Remotely sensed habitat maps may not be a good surrogate for predicting functional traits and multimetrics of fish assemblages, and must be used with caution when maximizing such aspects of assemblages is a priority for conservation planning.
RI Kelaher, Brendan/P-3647-2017
OI Kelaher, Brendan/0000-0002-7505-4412; Coleman, Melinda
   A/0000-0003-2623-633X
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0376-8929
EI 1469-4387
PD DEC
PY 2016
VL 43
IS 4
BP 368
EP 375
DI 10.1017/S0376892916000205
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000387551700007
ER

PT J
AU Traller, JC
   Cokus, SJ
   Lopez, DA
   Gaidarenko, O
   Smith, SR
   McCrow, JP
   Gallaher, SD
   Podell, S
   Thompson, M
   Cook, O
   Morselli, M
   Jaroszewicz, A
   Allen, EE
   Allen, AE
   Merchant, SS
   Pellegrini, M
   Hildebrand, M
AF Traller, Jesse C.
   Cokus, Shawn J.
   Lopez, David A.
   Gaidarenko, Olga
   Smith, Sarah R.
   McCrow, John P.
   Gallaher, Sean D.
   Podell, Sheila
   Thompson, Michael
   Cook, Orna
   Morselli, Marco
   Jaroszewicz, Artur
   Allen, Eric E.
   Allen, Andrew E.
   Merchant, Sabeeha S.
   Pellegrini, Matteo
   Hildebrand, Mark
TI Genome and methylome of the oleaginous diatom Cyclotella cryptica reveal
   genetic flexibility toward a high lipid phenotype
SO Biotechnology for Biofuels
DT Article
DE Diatom; Genome sequence; Cyclotella cryptica; Algae biofuel; Carbon
   metabolism; DNA methylation
ID THALASSIOSIRA-PSEUDONANA BACILLARIOPHYCEAE; MITOCHONDRIAL PYRUVATE
   CARRIER; PHAEODACTYLUM-TRICORNUTUM; TRANSPOSABLE ELEMENTS; EVOLUTIONARY
   HISTORY; SILICON DEFICIENCY; DNA METHYLATION; CG METHYLATION; MARINE
   DIATOM; CELL-WALL
AB Background: Improvement in the performance of eukaryotic microalgae for biofuel and bioproduct production is largely dependent on characterization of metabolic mechanisms within the cell. The marine diatom Cyclotella cryptica, which was originally identified in the Aquatic Species Program, is a promising strain of microalgae for large-scale production of biofuel and bioproducts, such as omega-3 fatty acids.
   Results: We sequenced the nuclear genome and methylome of this oleaginous diatom to identify the genetic traits that enable substantial accumulation of triacylglycerol. The genome is comprised of highly methylated repetitive sequence, which does not significantly change under silicon starved lipid induction, and data further suggests the primary role of DNA methylation is to suppress DNA transposition. Annotation of pivotal glycolytic, lipid metabolism, and carbohydrate degradation processes reveal an expanded enzyme repertoire in C. cryptica that would allow for an increased metabolic capacity toward triacylglycerol production. Identification of previously unidentified genes, including those involved in carbon transport and chitin metabolism, provide potential targets for genetic manipulation of carbon flux to further increase its lipid phenotype. New genetic tools were developed, bringing this organism on a par with other microalgae in terms of genetic manipulation and characterization approaches.6
   Conclusions: Functional annotation and detailed cross-species comparison of key carbon rich processes in C. cryptica highlights the importance of enzymatic subcellular compartmentation for regulation of carbon flux, which is often overlooked in photosynthetic microeukaryotes. The availability of the genome sequence, as well as advanced genetic manipulation tools enable further development of this organism for deployment in large-scale production systems.
OI Gallaher, Sean/0000-0002-9773-6051; McCrow, John/0000-0002-7014-5040;
   Allen, Andrew/0000-0001-5911-6081; Pellegrini,
   Matteo/0000-0001-9355-9564
TC 10
Z9 10
SN 1754-6834
PD NOV 25
PY 2016
VL 9
AR 258
DI 10.1186/s13068-016-0670-3
SC Biotechnology & Applied Microbiology; Energy & Fuels
UT WOS:000389379900002
PM 27933100
ER

PT J
AU Dolbeth, M
   Vendel, AL
   Baeta, A
   Pessanha, A
   Patricio, J
AF Dolbeth, M.
   Vendel, A. L.
   Baeta, A.
   Pessanha, A.
   Patricio, J.
TI Exploring ecosystem functioning in two Brazilian estuaries integrating
   fish diversity, species traits and food webs
SO MARINE ECOLOGY PROGRESS SERIES
DT Article
DE Disturbance; Functional diversity; Habitat filtering; Redundancy; Stable
   isotopes; Tropical
ID MARINE BIODIVERSITY; TROPICAL ESTUARIES; COMMUNITIES; ASSEMBLAGES;
   MANGROVE; PATTERNS; CONSERVATION; FRAMEWORK; ABUNDANCE; RICHNESS
AB Ecosystem functioning is assessed through research that spans multiple biological organisational levels and disciplines, and it is quantified by measuring the magnitude and dyna mics of several processes. This quantification is done using different tools, and the resulting information from each tool is often interpreted independently. Our main aim was to contribute to the understanding of the functioning of tropical estuarine ecosystems facing anthropogenic impact, using information on fish diversity, traits and food webs. We used biological and environmental data from 2 Brazilian estuaries with different levels and types of human disturbance: the heavily impacted Paraiba estuary and the environmentally protected Mamanguape estuary (IUCN, Protected Area Category V). Fish assemblages and their prey were collected along the salinity gradient in the dry and wet seasons, and we evaluated (1) species taxonomic diversity, (2) functional diversity based on effect traits and (3) food-web structure through analyses of the natural abundance of stable isotopes (carbon and nitrogen). Species turnover, i.e. the change in species identity, along each estuary was relatively high, and this dissimilarity was considerably greater than the trait turnover (i.e. low functional beta-diversity). These results highlight that, although habitat selection was an important driver of the coexistence of fish species due to spatial environmental gradients, the competition for resources might be high because species tended to use the system in a similar way. The relatively narrow range of both delta C-13 and delta N-15 values among fish species also implies competition for the same resources. Moreover, the delta N-15 values indicated anthropogenic inputs of nitrogen in both estuaries, regardless of their protection framework, which highlights the need for more effective conservation measures.
RI Baeta, Alexandra/Q-6704-2018; Dolbeth, Marina/I-3840-2013
OI Baeta, Alexandra/0000-0001-9898-9096; Dolbeth,
   Marina/0000-0002-8775-0351; PESSANHA, ANDRE/0000-0003-1878-6251
TC 7
Z9 7
SN 0171-8630
EI 1616-1599
PD NOV 24
PY 2016
VL 560
BP 41
EP 55
DI 10.3354/meps11895
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology;
   Oceanography
UT WOS:000390104900003
ER

PT J
AU Schnedler-Meyer, NA
   Mariani, P
   Kiorboe, T
AF Schnedler-Meyer, Nicolas Azana
   Mariani, Patrizio
   Kiorboe, Thomas
TI The global susceptibility of coastal forage fish to competition by large
   jellyfish
SO PROCEEDINGS OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY B-BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES
DT Article
DE competition; environmental drivers; jellyfish blooms; fish; water
   clarity; trait-based model
ID GELATINOUS ZOOPLANKTON; REGIME-SHIFTS; PELAGIC FISH; BLACK-SEA;
   BODY-MASS; ECOSYSTEM; RATES; TEMPERATURE; BLOOMS; CONSEQUENCES
AB Competition between large jellyfish and forage fish for zooplankton prey is both a possible cause of jellyfish increases and a concern for the management of marine ecosystems and fisheries. Identifying principal factors affecting this competition is therefore important for marine management, but the lack of both good quality data and a robust theoretical framework have prevented general global analyses. Here, we present a general mechanistic food web model that considers fundamental differences in feeding modes and predation pressure between fish and jellyfish. The model predicts forage fish dominance at low primary production, and a shift towards jellyfish with increasing productivity, turbidity and fishing. We present an index of global ecosystem susceptibility to shifts in fish-jellyfish dominance that compares well with data on jellyfish distributions and trends. The results are a step towards better understanding the processes that govern jellyfish occurrences globally and highlight the advantage of considering feeding traits in ecosystem models.
OI Schnedler-Meyer, Nicolas/0000-0002-9725-9646
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 0962-8452
EI 1471-2954
PD NOV 16
PY 2016
VL 283
IS 1842
AR 20161931
DI 10.1098/rspb.2016.1931
SC Life Sciences & Biomedicine - Other Topics; Environmental Sciences &
   Ecology; Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000388718700011
PM 28120793
ER

PT J
AU Acevedo-Trejos, E
   Brandt, G
   Smith, SL
   Merico, A
AF Acevedo-Trejos, Esteban
   Brandt, Gunnar
   Smith, S. Lan
   Merico, Agostino
TI PhytoSFDM version 1.0.0: Phytoplankton Size and Functional Diversity
   Model
SO GEOSCIENTIFIC MODEL DEVELOPMENT
DT Article
ID GROWTH-RATE; CELL-SIZE; COMMUNITIES; TRAITS; BIODIVERSITY; PATTERNS;
   PROGRESS; LIGHT; SEA
AB Biodiversity is one of the key mechanisms that facilitate the adaptive response of planktonic communities to a fluctuating environment. How to allow for such a flexible response in marine ecosystem models is, however, not entirely clear. One particular way is to resolve the natural complexity of phytoplankton communities by explicitly incorporating a large number of species or plankton functional types. Alternatively, models of aggregate community properties focus on macroecological quantities such as total biomass, mean trait, and trait variance (or functional trait diversity), thus reducing the observed natural complexity to a few mathematical expressions. We developed the PhytoSFDM modelling tool, which can resolve species discretely and can capture aggregate community properties. The tool also provides a set of methods for treating diversity under realistic oceanographic settings. This model is coded in Python and is distributed as open-source software. PhytoSFDM is implemented in a zero-dimensional physical scheme and can be applied to any location of the global ocean. We show that aggregate community models reduce computational complexity while preserving relevant macroecological features of phytoplankton communities. Compared to species-explicit models, aggregate models are more manageable in terms of number of equations and have faster computational times. Further developments of this tool should address the caveats associated with the assumptions of aggregate community models and about implementations into spatially resolved physical settings (one-dimensional and three-dimensional). With PhytoSFDM we embrace the idea of promoting open-source software and en-courage scientists to build on this modelling tool to further improve our understanding of the role that biodiversity plays in shaping marine ecosystems.
RI Smith, S./D-2493-2012
OI Smith, S./0000-0002-2338-5893; Merico, Agostino/0000-0001-8095-8056;
   Trainer, Clarivate/0000-0001-9593-4831; Acevedo-Trejos,
   Esteban/0000-0003-4222-7062
TC 5
Z9 5
SN 1991-959X
EI 1991-9603
PD NOV 14
PY 2016
VL 9
IS 11
BP 4071
EP 4085
DI 10.5194/gmd-9-4071-2016
SC Geology
UT WOS:000387988900001
ER

PT J
AU Horn, H
   Slaby, BM
   Jahn, MT
   Bayer, K
   Moitinho-Silva, L
   Forster, F
   Abdelmohsen, UR
   Hentschel, U
AF Horn, Hennes
   Slaby, Beate M.
   Jahn, Martin T.
   Bayer, Kristina
   Moitinho-Silva, Lucas
   Foerster, Frank
   Abdelmohsen, Usama R.
   Hentschel, Ute
TI An Enrichment of CRISPR and Other Defense-Related Features in Marine
   Sponge-Associated Microbial Metagenomes
SO FRONTIERS IN MICROBIOLOGY
DT Article
DE metagenomes; defense; CRISPR; restriction modification; sponge
   microbiome; seawater
ID RESTRICTION-MODIFICATION SYSTEMS; NUCLEOTIDE COMPOSITION;
   APLYSINA-AEROPHOBA; CAS SYSTEMS; SINGLE-CELL; EVOLUTION; GENOME;
   BACTERIAL; DNA; CLASSIFICATION
AB Many marine sponges are populated by dense and taxonomically diverse microbial consortia. We employed a metagenomics approach to unravel the differences in the functional gene repertoire among three Mediterranean sponge species, Petrosia ficiformis, Sarcotragus foetidus, Aplysina aerophoba and seawater. Different signatures were observed between sponge and seawater metagenomes with regard to microbial community composition, GC content, and estimated bacterial genome size. Our analysis showed further a pronounced repertoire for defense systems in sponge metagenomes. Specifically, clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats, restriction modification, DNA phosphorothioation and phage growth limitation systems were enriched in sponge metagenomes. These data suggest that defense is an important functional trait for an existence within sponges that requires mechanisms to defend against foreign DNA from microorganisms and viruses. This study contributes to an understanding of the evolutionary arms race between viruses/phages and bacterial genomes and it sheds light on the bacterial defenses that have evolved in the context of the sponge holobiont.
RI Forster, Frank/A-2181-2010; Hentschel, Ute/H-8343-2013
OI Forster, Frank/0000-0003-4166-5423; Hentschel, Ute/0000-0003-0596-790X;
   Bayer, Kristina/0000-0003-2789-9805; Slaby, Beate/0000-0002-9480-1460
TC 12
Z9 13
SN 1664-302X
PD NOV 8
PY 2016
VL 7
AR 1751
DI 10.3389/fmicb.2016.01751
SC Microbiology
UT WOS:000388693900001
PM 27877161
ER

PT J
AU Clare, DS
   Spencer, M
   Robinson, LA
   Frid, CLJ
AF Clare, David S.
   Spencer, Matthew
   Robinson, Leonie A.
   Frid, Christopher L. J.
TI Species-Specific Effects on Ecosystem Functioning Can Be Altered by
   Interspecific Interactions
SO PLOS ONE
DT Article
ID AMPHIPOD COROPHIUM-VOLUTATOR; NEREIS-DIVERSICOLOR MULLER,O.F.; RAGWORM
   HEDISTE-DIVERSICOLOR; POPULATION-DYNAMICS; TEMPORAL VARIATION;
   NORTH-ATLANTIC; EAST ENGLAND; BIODIVERSITY; SEDIMENT; COMMUNITIES
AB Biological assemblages are constantly undergoing change, with species being introduced, extirpated and experiencing shifts in their densities. Theory and experimentation suggest that the impacts of such change on ecosystem functioning should be predictable based on the biological traits of the species involved. However, interspecific interactions could alter how species affect functioning, with the strength and sign of interactions potentially depending on environmental context (e.g. homogenous vs. heterogeneous conditions) and the function considered. Here, we assessed how concurrent changes to the densities of two common marine benthic invertebrates, Corophium volutator and Hediste diversicolor, affected the ecological functions of organic matter consumption and benthic-pelagic nutrient flux. Complementary experiments were conducted within homogenous laboratory microcosms and naturally heterogeneous field plots. When the densities of the species were increased within microcosms, interspecific interactions enhanced effects on organic matter consumption and reduced effects on nutrient flux. Trait-based predictions of how each species would affect functioning were only consistently supported when the density of the other species was low. In field plots, increasing the density of either species had a positive effect on organic matter consumption (with no significant interspecific interactions) but no effect on nutrient flux. Our results indicate that species-specific effects on ecosystem functioning can be altered by interspecific interactions, which can be either facilitative (positive) or antagonistic (negative) depending on the function considered. The impacts of biodiversity change may therefore not be predictable based solely on the biological traits of the species involved. Possible explanations for why interactions were detected in microcosms but not in the field are discussed.
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 1932-6203
PD NOV 3
PY 2016
VL 11
IS 11
AR e0165739
DI 10.1371/journal.pone.0165739
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000386910000054
PM 27812164
ER

PT J
AU Bachman, PM
   Huizinga, KM
   Jensen, PD
   Mueller, G
   Tan, JG
   Uffman, JP
   Levine, SL
AF Bachman, Pamela M.
   Huizinga, Kristin M.
   Jensen, Peter D.
   Mueller, Geoffrey
   Tan, Jianguo
   Uffman, Joshua P.
   Levine, Steven L.
TI Ecological risk assessment for DvSnf7 RNA: A plant-incorporated
   protectant with targeted activity against western corn rootworm
SO REGULATORY TOXICOLOGY AND PHARMACOLOGY
DT Article
DE Non-target organism; RNAi; GE crop; Ecological risk assessment; DvSnf7;
   MON 87411
ID DOUBLE-STRANDED-RNA; GENE; INTERFERENCE; CROPS; QUANTIFICATION;
   MANAGEMENT; TOLERANCE; SALIVA; VIRUS; GRAIN
AB MON 87411 maize, which expresses DvSnf7 RNA, was developed to provide an additional mode of action to confer protection against corn rootworm (Diabrotica spp.). A critical step in the registration of a genetically engineered crop with an insecticidal trait is performing an ecological risk assessment to evaluate the potential for adverse ecological effects. For MON 87411, an assessment plan was developed that met specific protection goals by characterizing the routes and levels of exposure, and testing representative functional taxa that would be directly or indirectly exposed in the environment. The potential for toxicity of DvSnf7 RNA was evaluated with a harmonized battery of non-target organisms (NTOs) that included invertebrate predators, parasitoids, pollinators, soil biota as well as aquatic and terrestrial vertebrate species. Laboratory tests evaluated ecologically relevant endpoints such as survival, growth, development, and reproduction and were of sufficient duration to assess the potential for adverse effects. No adverse effects were observed with any species tested at, or above, the maximum expected environmental concentration (MEEC). All margins of exposure for NTOs were >10-fold the MEEC. Therefore, it is reasonable to conclude that exposure to DvSnf7 RNA, both directly and indirectly, is safe for NTOs at the expected field exposure levels. (C) 2016 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license.
TC 12
Z9 13
SN 0273-2300
EI 1096-0295
PD NOV
PY 2016
VL 81
BP 77
EP 88
DI 10.1016/j.yrtph.2016.08.001
SC Legal Medicine; Pharmacology & Pharmacy; Toxicology
UT WOS:000389865600010
PM 27494948
ER

PT J
AU Pereto, SCAS
   Ribas, LGD
   Wojciechowski, J
   Ceschin, F
   Dittrich, J
   Bezerra, LAV
   Padial, AA
AF Pereto, Suelen C. A. S.
   dos Santos Ribas, Luiz Guilherme
   Wojciechowski, Juliana
   Ceschin, Fernanda
   Dittrich, Jaqueline
   Valoes Bezerra, Luis Artur
   Padial, Andre A.
TI Trade-off in leaf and root investment of an abundant aquatic macrophyte
   in a Neotropical floodplain
SO FUNDAMENTAL AND APPLIED LIMNOLOGY
DT Article
DE Phenotypic plasticity; Eichhornia azurea; functional traits; water flow;
   nutrient availability; Upper Parana River floodplain
ID ADAPTIVE PHENOTYPIC PLASTICITY; EICHHORNIA-AZUREA KUNTH; PARANA RIVER
   FLOODPLAIN; WATER-LEVEL VARIATION; PHOSPHORUS UPTAKE; CLIMATE-CHANGE;
   SAO-PAULO; BRAZIL; DIVERSITY; PATTERNS
AB Phenotypic plasticity in macrophytes is observed when morphological and physiological features respond to environmental variation, and a trade-off is observed when there is investment in a specific feature to the detriment of another. We investigated causes for the trade-off in leaf and root investment in Eichhornia azurea, a macrophyte of major importance in structuring ecosystems in a large Neotropical floodplain. At riverine systems, the leaf/root ratio of E. azurea is typically related to different environmental conditions. We hypothesized that the trade-off between leaf and root investment would depend on water flow and water renewal. Our results indicated that, in lentic ecosystems, the investment in roots was higher than in leaves when compared to semi-lotic ecosystems. This result was probably explained due to the poor nutrient availability as a consequence of low water flow in lentic ecosystems. In semi-lotic ecosystems, instead, nutrient absorption may be higher, favoring high leaf investment. Indeed, when this trade-off is compared between lentic habitats with different water exchanges, investment in leaves is higher in habitats with higher water exchange, and consequently with a constant renewal in nutrient availability.
RI Bezerra, Luis Artur/J-3969-2015; Padial, Andre/H-8977-2012; Bezerra,
   Luis Artur/S-1236-2018
OI Bezerra, Luis Artur/0000-0003-1954-5556; Padial,
   Andre/0000-0002-8766-5974; Bezerra, Luis Artur/0000-0003-1954-5556;
   Wojciechowski, Juliana/0000-0002-8841-8342
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1863-9135
PD NOV
PY 2016
VL 188
IS 4
BP 309
EP 314
DI 10.1127/fal/2016/0879
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000388813400004
ER

PT J
AU Montalto, V
   Helmuth, B
   Ruti, PM
   Dell'Aquila, A
   Rinaldi, A
   Sara, G
AF Montalto, Valeria
   Helmuth, Brian
   Ruti, Paolo M.
   Dell'Aquila, Alessandro
   Rinaldi, Alessandro
   Sara, Gianluca
TI A mechanistic approach reveals non linear effects of climate warming on
   mussels throughout the Mediterranean sea
SO CLIMATIC CHANGE
DT Article
ID ENERGY BUDGET MODEL; FUNCTIONAL TRAITS; THERMAL-STRESS; GLOBAL-CHANGE;
   ECOSYSTEM ENGINEERS; INTERTIDAL MUSSELS; COVARIATION METHOD; SPECIES
   RESPONSES; MARINE ECOSYSTEMS; BODY-TEMPERATURE
AB There is a dire need to forecast the ecological impacts of global climate change at scales relevant to policy and management. We used three interconnected models (climatic, biophysical and energetics) to estimate changes in growth, reproduction and mortality risk by 2050, for three commercially and ecologically important bivalves at 51 sites in the Mediterranean Sea. These results predict highly variable responses (both positive and negative) in the time to reproductive maturity and in the risk of lethality among species and sites that do not conform to simple latitudinal gradients, and which would be undetectable by methods focused only on lethal limits and/or range boundaries.
RI Dell'Aquila, Alessandro/E-5582-2017
OI Dell'Aquila, Alessandro/0000-0002-5498-6966; Helmuth,
   Brian/0000-0003-0180-3414
TC 6
Z9 6
SN 0165-0009
EI 1573-1480
PD NOV
PY 2016
VL 139
IS 2
BP 293
EP 306
DI 10.1007/s10584-016-1780-4
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Meteorology & Atmospheric Sciences
UT WOS:000387581400012
ER

PT J
AU Malerba, ME
   Heimann, K
   Connolly, SR
AF Malerba, Martino E.
   Heimann, Kirsten
   Connolly, Sean R.
TI Nutrient utilization traits vary systematically with intraspecific cell
   size plasticity
SO FUNCTIONAL ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE allometric scaling; environmental gradients; green alga; intraspecific
   trait variability; kinetic parameters; nitrogen assimilation;
   observation error; process noise; process-based models; time series
ID NITRATE UPTAKE; PHYTOPLANKTON COMMUNITIES; MARINE-PHYTOPLANKTON;
   PHENOTYPIC PLASTICITY; FUNCTIONAL TRAITS; UPTAKE KINETICS;
   FLOW-CYTOMETRY; LIFE-HISTORY; GROWTH-RATE; MODEL
AB Trait-based approaches are increasingly used to help understanding community structure and ecosystem functioning. A large proportion of trait-based studies define a species by its mean trait values and assume intraspecific trait variability to be negligible compared to interspecific differences. However, this assumption is rarely tested. Phenotypic cell size plasticity can be particularly important in phytoplankton species, which are known for their rapid changes in cell size in response to variations in environmental conditions. While phytoplankton traits show clear systematic trends with mean cell size across species, how size-related plasticity influences the dynamics of a species remains unknown. In this study, we evaluate the effects of cell size plasticity on the nitrogen (N) utilization traits of the green alga Desmodesmus armatus (Chlorophyta), reared in different inorganic nitrogen sources (nitrate, ammonium or both) and nutrient histories (N-replete and N-deplete). Results show that traits for per-cell ammonium uptake, maximum cell growth rate and minimum N-quota change substantially within the study species, depending on mean cell size and nutrient history. In contrast, per-cell nitrate uptake was independent of cell size. These results indicate that representing phytoplankton species only by their mean trait values could underestimate the physiological performance of a species by as much as one order of magnitude. This study highlights the extent to which explicit incorporation of within-species trait variability can enhance our understanding of how species performance changes along environmental gradients.
RI Heimann, Kirsten/N-1512-2013
OI Heimann, Kirsten/0000-0003-2691-9659; Connolly,
   Sean/0000-0003-1537-0859; Malerba, Martino E./0000-0002-7480-4779
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 0269-8463
EI 1365-2435
PD NOV
PY 2016
VL 30
IS 11
BP 1745
EP 1755
DI 10.1111/1365-2435.12662
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000387362600003
ER

PT J
AU Takahashi, K
   Tanaka, S
AF Takahashi, Koichi
   Tanaka, Saeka
TI Relative importance of habitat filtering and limiting similarity on
   species assemblages of alpine and subalpine plant communities
SO JOURNAL OF PLANT RESEARCH
DT Article
DE Alpine plants; Community structure; Environmental conditions; Functional
   traits; Niche; Species assemblage
ID ECOLOGY STRATEGY SCHEME; LEAF LIFE-SPAN; CENTRAL JAPAN; ENVIRONMENTAL
   VARIATION; POSITIVE INTERACTIONS; TIMBERLINE CONIFERS; COASTAL
   CALIFORNIA; FUNCTIONAL TRAITS; PATTERNS; FOREST
AB This study examined how habitat filtering and limiting similarity affect species assemblages of alpine and subalpine plant communities along a slope gradient on Mt. Norikura in central Japan. Plant traits (plant height, individual leaf area, specific leaf area (SLA), leaf linearity, leaf nitrogen and chlorophyll concentrations) and abiotic environmental factors (elevation, slope inclination, ground surface texture, soil water, soil pH, soil nutrient concentrations of NH4-N and NO3-N) were examined. The metrics of variance, range, kurtosis and the standard deviation of neighbor distance divided by the range of traits present (SDNDr) were calculated for each plant trait to measure trait distribution patterns. Limiting similarity was detected only for chlorophyll concentration. By contrast, habitat filtering was detected for individual leaf area, SLA, leaf linearity, chlorophyll concentration. Abiotic environmental factors were summarized by the principal component analysis (PCA). The first PCA axis positively correlated with elevation and soil pH, and negatively correlated with sand cover, soil water, NH4-N and NO3-N concentrations. High values of the first PCA axis represent the wind-exposed upper slope with lower soil moisture and nutrient availabilities. Plant traits changed along the first PCA axis. Leaf area, SLA and chlorophyll concentration decreased, and leaf linearity increased with the first PCA axis. This study showed that the species assemblage of alpine and subalpine plants was determined mainly by habitat filtering, indicating that abiotic environmental factors are more important for species assemblage than interspecific competition. Therefore, only species adapting to abiotic environments can distribute to these environments.
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 0918-9440
EI 1618-0860
PD NOV
PY 2016
VL 129
IS 6
BP 1041
EP 1049
DI 10.1007/s10265-016-0852-x
SC Plant Sciences
UT WOS:000386506000005
PM 27447705
ER

PT J
AU Sternberg, M
AF Sternberg, Marcelo
TI From America to the Holy Land: disentangling plant traits of the
   invasive Heterotheca subaxillaris (Lam.) Britton & Rusby
SO PLANT ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE Biological invasions; Coastal sand dunes; Israel; Phenology; Root
   allocation; Root length
ID COASTAL DUNES; ALIEN; LEAF; POPULATIONS; GERMINATION; DIMORPHISM;
   ASTERACEAE; ALLOMETRY; DIVERSITY; EVOLUTION
AB Understanding which plant traits confer invasiveness has been a central question in biological invasions research. Heterotheca subaxillaris (camphor-weed), an American plant, is an important invader of coastal sand dunes in Israel. Nevertheless, there has been no comprehensive comparative analysis of H. subaxillaris plant traits from native versus introduced habitats that sheds light on the invasion success of this species in Israel. I studied H. subaxillaris from native (US) versus introduced (Israel) populations to identify functional traits that accorded this species invasion success in Israel. Plant traits considered were shoot and root biomass production, root-shoot ratio, shoot height, root length, number of inflorescences, achene number and mass, and life span. Achenes (seeds) of all populations were germinated under common growing conditions to produce F1 achenes. F1 seedlings were grown in a large-scale common garden aeroponic system until flowering and then harvested. Introduced populations exhibited marked differences in measured parameters than native populations. Notably, root length of introduced populations exceeded 5 m, almost fourfold greater than that of native populations, allowing access to soil moisture and nutrients from deep sand layers and late-summer flowering. Life span of introduced populations almost doubled that of American populations. To the best of my knowledge, this is the first documentation of adaptive micro-evolutionary change favoring deep root allocation and phenological change in an invasive species in sand dunes. Seemingly, a rapid evolutionary change favoring root resource allocation occurred within introduced populations, allowing establishment, expansion, and successful invasion in the harsh ecosystem of Israel's coastal sand dunes.
OI Sternberg, Marcelo/0000-0001-8710-4141
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 1385-0237
EI 1573-5052
PD NOV
PY 2016
VL 217
IS 11
SI SI
BP 1307
EP 1314
DI 10.1007/s11258-016-0656-z
SC Plant Sciences; Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Forestry
UT WOS:000385195700003
ER

PT J
AU Dias, JD
   Simoes, NR
   Meerhoff, M
   Lansac-Toha, FA
   Velho, LFM
   Bonecker, CC
AF Dias, Juliana Deo
   Simoes, Nadson Ressye
   Meerhoff, Mariana
   Lansac-Toha, Fabio Amodeo
   Machado Velho, Luiz Felipe
   Bonecker, Claudia Costa
TI Hydrological dynamics drives zooplankton metacommunity structure in a
   Neotropical floodplain
SO HYDROBIOLOGIA
DT Article
DE Body size; Dispersal; Flood dynamics; Spatial heterogeneity; Variance
   partitioning
ID PARANA RIVER FLOODPLAIN; HIGHLY INTERCONNECTED PONDS; AQUATIC
   INVERTEBRATES; RELATIVE IMPORTANCE; COMMUNITY STRUCTURE; POOL
   METACOMMUNITY; SPECIES RICHNESS; LOCAL PROCESSES; LONG-TERM; DISPERSAL
AB The maintenance of biodiversity in dynamic landscapes can be explained through the unifying concept of the metacommunity, an ecological system with a changing structure that arises from both the biotic features of its component species and from changing temporal processes. We evaluated the relative importance of environmental factors and spatial factors on the structure of metacommunities of zooplankton in a Neotropical floodplain system, in relation to hydrological dynamics and potential connections among lakes. Zooplankton was sampled from 16 to 22 shallow lakes during droughts and floods in two hydrologically contrasting years. Copepods appeared to be more limited by their dispersal potential, while testate amoebae and rotifers seemed to be controlled mostly by environmental variables. These findings stress the importance of the species sorting metacommunity paradigm for groups with the smallest propagules and adult body sizes. The importance of environmental factors rather than spatial factors was apparent during floods, likely due to the facilitation of animal dispersal by floods. Our results demonstrate that the importance of these factors depends on both the functional traits of major zooplankton groups and the hydrological dynamics of the region.
RI Lansac-Toha, Fabio/I-3556-2016; Velho, Luiz Felipe/I-9130-2016; Dias,
   Juliana/B-3184-2013; Bonecker, Claudia/D-5946-2013; Simoes,
   Nadson/J-9701-2012
OI Velho, Luiz Felipe/0000-0001-8111-4955; Simoes,
   Nadson/0000-0002-4577-9033
TC 8
Z9 9
SN 0018-8158
EI 1573-5117
PD NOV
PY 2016
VL 781
IS 1
BP 109
EP 125
DI 10.1007/s10750-016-2827-2
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000385154400009
ER

PT J
AU Hu, Y
   Kelly, LT
   Gillespie, GR
   Jessop, TS
AF Hu, Yang
   Kelly, Luke T.
   Gillespie, Graeme R.
   Jessop, Tim S.
TI Lizard responses to forest fire and timber harvesting: Complementary
   insights from species and community approaches
SO FOREST ECOLOGY AND MANAGEMENT
DT Article
DE Reptile assemblage; Disturbance; Burning; Logging; Functional diversity
ID COARSE WOODY DEBRIS; PINE-HARDWOOD FORESTS; LOW-INTENSITY FIRE;
   FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; HABITAT FRAGMENTATION; REPTILE ASSEMBLAGE;
   TEMPERATE FORESTS; BRAZILIAN AMAZON; DISTURBANCE; BIODIVERSITY
AB Understanding the relationship between community composition and ecosystem function is essential for managing forests with complex disturbance regimes. Studies of animal responses to fire and timber harvesting in forest ecosystems typically focus on a single level of community diversity. Measures of species abundance and diversity at the community level, along with measures of functional diversity that incorporate information on species traits, provide opportunities for complementary insights into biodiversity responses to disturbances. We quantified community and functional responses of a temperate forest lizard community to fire and rotational logging using metrics including species-specific abundance, community abundance, species richness and evenness, as well as trait-based measures of functional diversity. We used non-linear regression models to examine the relationships between reptile data and time since fire and timber harvesting, using sites arrayed along a 30-years post-disturbance chronosequence. We modelled responses separately in two major vegetation types: coastal Banksia woodland and lowland eucalypt forests. Species and community measures offered different insights into the role of fire and logging. Species responses to disturbance differed between disturbance type and vegetation type. Four species exhibited significant population responses to either fire or timber harvesting, while the rest were unaffected by either disturbance. At the community level, species richness and community abundance increased significantly with time since fire in woodland vegetation. In forest vegetation, community abundance decreased with time since fire. Surprisingly, community evenness and functional diversity did not show marked responses to fire or timber harvesting. This is likely a result of trait homogeneity and the asynchrony in species responses to disturbance. We advocate using multiple measures of community composition - incorporating species-specific information, community metrics and functional traits - to ensure a more holistic understanding of disturbance ecology in forest landscapes. (C) 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
OI Kelly, Luke/0000-0002-3127-3111
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 0378-1127
EI 1872-7042
PD NOV 1
PY 2016
VL 379
BP 206
EP 215
DI 10.1016/j.foreco.2016.07.040
SC Forestry
UT WOS:000383816600021
ER

PT J
AU Banas, NS
   Campbell, RG
AF Banas, Neil S.
   Campbell, Robert G.
TI Traits controlling body size in copepods: separating general constraints
   from species-specific strategies
SO MARINE ECOLOGY PROGRESS SERIES
DT Article
DE Copepods; Body size; Development rate; Growth rate; Zooplankton;
   Trait-based; Diversity
ID MARINE PLANKTONIC COPEPODS; TEMPERATURE-DEPENDENT DEVELOPMENT;
   DEVELOPMENT RATES; CALANUS-HELGOLANDICUS; PELAGIC ECOSYSTEM;
   EGG-PRODUCTION; 3/4-POWER LAW; GLOBAL RATES; GROWTH-RATES; FOOD
AB A new synthesis of laboratory measurements of food-saturated development and growth across diverse copepod taxa was conducted in a theoretical framework that distinguishes general allometric constraints on copepod physiology from contingent strategies that correlate with size for other reasons. After temperature correction, the allometry of growth rate is inconsistent between the ontogeny of Calanus spp., where it follows the classic -0.3 power-law scaling, and a broader spectrum of adult size W-a (0.3 to 2000 mu g C, Oithona spp. to Neocalanus spp.), across which the classic scaling appears to represent only an upper limit. Over the full size spectrum, after temperature correction, a growth rate g(0) relative to the -0.3 power law correlates with adult size better than does relative (temperature- corrected) development rate u(0); in contrast, at a finer scale of diversity (among Calanus spp., or among large (>50 mu g C) calanoids in general), u(0) is the better correlate with adult size and the effect of g(0) is insignificant. Across all these scales, the ratio of relative growth and development rates g(0)/u(0) is a better predictor of adult size than g(0) or u(0) alone, consistent with a simple model of individual growth.
OI Banas, Neil/0000-0002-1892-9497
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0171-8630
EI 1616-1599
PD OCT 25
PY 2016
VL 558
BP 21
EP 33
DI 10.3354/meps11873
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology;
   Oceanography
UT WOS:000387116200003
ER

PT J
AU Smith, SL
   Vallina, SM
   Merico, A
AF Smith, S. Lan
   Vallina, Sergio M.
   Merico, Agostino
TI Phytoplankton size-diversity mediates an emergent trade-off in ecosystem
   functioning for rare versus frequent disturbances
SO SCIENTIFIC REPORTS
DT Article
ID COMMUNITY ECOLOGY; MODEL; OCEAN; COMPLEMENTARITY; BIODIVERSITY;
   STABILITY; FRAMEWORK; DYNAMICS; TRAITS; GROWTH
AB Biodiversity is known to be an important determinant of ecosystem-level functions and processes. Although theories have been proposed to explain the generally positive relationship between, for example, biodiversity and productivity, it remains unclear which mechanisms underlie the observed variations in Biodiversity-Ecosystem Function (BEF) relationships. Using a continuous trait-distribution model for a phytoplankton community of gleaners competing with opportunists, and subjecting it to differing frequencies of disturbance, we find that species selection tends to enhance temporal species complementarity, which is maximised at high disturbance frequency and intermediate functional diversity. This leads to the emergence of a trade-off whereby increasing diversity tends to enhance short-term adaptive capacity under frequent disturbance while diminishing long-term productivity under infrequent disturbance. BEF relationships therefore depend on both disturbance frequency and the timescale of observation.
RI Smith, S./D-2493-2012
OI Smith, S./0000-0002-2338-5893; Trainer, Clarivate/0000-0001-9593-4831;
   Merico, Agostino/0000-0001-8095-8056
TC 7
Z9 7
SN 2045-2322
PD OCT 17
PY 2016
VL 6
AR 34170
DI 10.1038/srep34170
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000385350100001
PM 27748359
ER

PT J
AU Leruste, A
   Malet, N
   Munaron, D
   Derolez, V
   Hatey, E
   Collos, Y
   De Wit, R
   Bec, B
AF Leruste, A.
   Malet, N.
   Munaron, D.
   Derolez, V.
   Hatey, E.
   Collos, Y.
   De Wit, R.
   Bec, B.
TI First steps of ecological restoration in Mediterranean lagoons: Shifts
   in phytoplankton communities
SO ESTUARINE COASTAL AND SHELF SCIENCE
DT Article
DE Phytoplankton; Coastal lagoons; Nutrient; Sewage effluents;
   Re-oligotrophication
ID HARMFUL ALGAL BLOOMS; COASTAL LAGOON; MARINE-PHYTOPLANKTON; SHALLOW
   LAKES; RE-OLIGOTROPHICATION; WATER-QUALITY; HPLC METHOD; CELL-SIZE;
   EUTROPHICATION; NUTRIENT
AB Along the French Mediterranean coast, a complex of eight lagoons underwent intensive eutrophication over four decades, mainly related to nutrient over-enrichment from continuous sewage discharges. The lagoon complex displayed a wide trophic gradient from mesotrophy to hypertrophy and primary production was dominated by phytoplankton communities. In 2005, the implementation of an 11 km offshore outfall system diverted the treated sewage effluents leading to a drastic reduction of anthropogenic inputs of nitrogen and phosphorus into the lagoons. Time series data have been examined from 2000 to 2013 for physical, chemical and biological (phytoplankton) variables of the water column during the summer period. Since 2006, total nitrogen and phosphorus concentrations as well as chlorophyll biomass strongly decreased revealing an improvement in lagoon water quality. In summertime, the decline in phytoplankton biomass was accompanied by shifts in community structure and composition that could be explained by adopting a functional approach by considering the common functional traits of the main algal groups. These phytoplankton communities were dominated by functional groups of small-sized and fast-growing algae (diatoms, cryptophytes and green algae). The trajectories of summer phytoplankton communities displayed a complex response to changing nutrient loads over tithe. While diatoms were the major group in 2006 in all the lagoons, the summer phytoplankton composition in hypertrophic lagoons has shifted towards green algae, which are particularly well adapted to summertime conditions. All lagoons showed increasing proportion and occurrence of peridinin-rich dinophytes over time, probably related to their capacity for mixotrophy. The diversity patterns were marked by a strong variability in eutrophic and hypertrophic lagoons whereas phytoplankton community structure reached the highest diversity and stability in mesotrophic lagoons. We observe that during the re-oligotrophication process in coastal lagoons, phytoplankton shows complex trajectories with similarities with those observed in freshwater lake systems. (C) 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
OI Derolez, Valerie/0000-0002-6392-971X; Munaron,
   Dominique/0000-0003-0718-284X; Malet, Nathalie/0000-0003-1922-527X
TC 8
Z9 8
SN 0272-7714
EI 1096-0015
PD OCT 5
PY 2016
VL 180
BP 190
EP 203
DI 10.1016/j.ecss.2016.06.029
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000384866900019
ER

PT J
AU Zhao, L
   Xu, GJ
   Wang, Z
   Xu, HL
AF Zhao, Lu
   Xu, Guangjian
   Wang, Zheng
   Xu, Henglong
TI Body-size spectra of biofilm-dwelling protozoa and their seasonal shift
   in coastal ecosystems
SO EUROPEAN JOURNAL OF PROTISTOLOGY
DT Article
DE Bioassessment; Biofilm-dwelling protozoa; Body-size spectrum; Marine
   ecosystems; Seasonal succession
ID MARINE WATER-QUALITY; CILIATE COMMUNITIES; SPECIES POOL; YELLOW SEA;
   ENVIRONMENTAL-CONDITIONS; FUNCTIONAL-GROUPS; NORTHERN CHINA; JIAOZHOU
   BAY; RESPONSES; INDEX
AB Community-based assessment of protozoa is usually performed at a taxon-dependent resolution. As an inherent 'taxon-free' trait, however, body-size spectrum has proved to be a highly informative indicator to summarize the functional structure of a community in both community research and monitoring programs in aquatic ecosystems. To demonstrate the relationships between the taxon-free resolution of protozoan communities and water conditions, the body-size spectra of biofilm-dwelling protozoa and their seasonal shift and environmental drivers were explored based on an annual dataset collected monthly from coastal waters of the Yellow Sea, northern China. Body sizes were calculated in equivalent spherical diameter (ESD). Among a total of 8 body-size ranks, S2 (19-27 mu m), S3 (28-36 mu m), S4 (37-50 mu m) and S5 (53-71 mu m) were the top four levels in frequency of occurrence, while rank Si (13-17 mu m), S2 and S4 were the dominant levels in abundance. These dominants showed a clear seasonal succession: S2/S4 (spring) -> S2/S4 (summer) -> S4 (autumn) -> S2 (winter) in frequency of occurrence; Si (spring) -> S4 (summer) -> S2 (autumn) -> Si (winter) in abundance. Bootstrapped average analysis showed a clear seasonal shift in body-size spectra of the protozoa during a 1-year cycle, and the best-matching analysis demonstrated that the temporal variations in frequency of occurrence and abundance were significantly correlated with water temperature, pH, dissolved oxygen (DO), alone or in combination with chemical oxygen demand (COD) and nutrients. Thus, the body-size spectra of biofilm-dwelling protozoa were seasonally shaped and might be used as a time and cost efficient bioindicator of water quality in marine ecosystems. (C) 2016 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.
TC 6
Z9 6
SN 0932-4739
EI 1618-0429
PD OCT
PY 2016
VL 56
BP 32
EP 40
DI 10.1016/j.ejop.2016.07.003
SC Microbiology
UT WOS:000390970100005
PM 27468744
ER

PT J
AU van der Linden, P
   Borja, A
   Rodriquez, JG
   Muxika, I
   Galparsoro, I
   Patricio, J
   Verissimo, H
   Marques, JC
AF van der Linden, Pieter
   Borja, Angel
   German Rodriquez, Jose
   Muxika, Inigo
   Galparsoro, Ibon
   Patricio, Joana
   Verissimo, Helena
   Marques, Joao Carlos
TI Spatial and temporal response of multiple trait-based indices to
   natural- and anthropogenic seafloor disturbance (effluents)
SO ECOLOGICAL INDICATORS
DT Article
DE Ecosystem functioning; Impact assessment; Marine Strategy Framework
   Directive; Macroinvertebrates; Biodiversity; Ecological indicators
ID MARINE BIOTIC INDEX; SOFT-BOTTOM BENTHOS; BOHAI BAY CHINA; SPECIES
   TRAITS; FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; BIOLOGICAL TRAITS; M-AMBI; PROPOSED
   MODIFICATIONS; ECOLOGICAL QUALITY; HUMAN PRESSURES
AB To support ecosystem-based management and achieve the Good Environmental Status (GES) of marine waters it is important to better comprehend the relationships between biodiversity and environmental disturbance (anthropogenic and natural). Biotic indices are widely used in studies to help understanding these relationships and to assess the environmental status of waters. In recent years, trait-based indices rapidly emerged as an alternative 'functional' approach to serve this purpose. In this study, we analysed how two indices based upon the mean (community-weighted mean trait value-CWM) and the diversity of multiple traits (Rao's quadratic entropy-Rao) in a macroinvertebrate community respond to natural and anthropogenic seafloor disturbance (effluents) and we compared their performance with the widely used AMBI and M-AMBI. Our results demonstrate that CWM and Rao were not effective in indicating anthropogenic disturbance in the Basque coast, Bay of Biscay. The main reason was probably that many traits did not have a strong link with this type of disturbance. Besides, the mechanistic links between certain traits and their response to anthropogenic seafloor disturbance in marine environments is currently not well understood. From a management perspective: the CWM does not provide a single value indicating a quality status, which makes it a difficult tool to use and interpret. This index is probably more useful for scientists who want to explore and understand different aspects of community functioning. On the other hand, Rao and other indices expressing trait diversity do provide a single value of functioning; therefore they could potentially be effectively used for management purposes. However, to improve its performance, detailed and accurate trait data is required, which is currently lacking for many marine species. (C) 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
RI Borja, Angel/I-3665-2018; Muxika, Inigo/B-8622-2009; Rodriguez, Jose
   German/B-8232-2009
OI Borja, Angel/0000-0003-1601-2025; Muxika, Inigo/0000-0002-9181-3781;
   Rodriguez, Jose German/0000-0003-1565-4851; Galparsoro,
   Ibon/0000-0002-5031-525X; MARQUES, JOAO CARLOS/0000-0001-8865-8189;
   Verissimo, Helena/0000-0003-3971-8696
TC 9
Z9 9
SN 1470-160X
EI 1872-7034
PD OCT
PY 2016
VL 69
BP 617
EP 628
DI 10.1016/j.ecolind.2016.05.020
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000388785100061
ER

PT J
AU Prisco, I
   Carboni, M
   Jucker, T
   Acosta, ATR
AF Prisco, Irene
   Carboni, Marta
   Jucker, Tommaso
   Acosta, Alicia T. R.
TI Temporal changes in the vegetation of Italian coastal dunes: identifying
   winners and losers through the lens of functional traits
SO JOURNAL OF APPLIED ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE coastal habitats conservation; dunes; ecological indicators; functional
   traits; land-use change; Natura 2000 network; protected areas;
   psammophilous habitats; temporal trends; vegetation data base
ID SANDY BEACH ECOSYSTEMS; NATURA 2000 NETWORK; CLIMATE-CHANGE;
   BIODIVERSITY CONSERVATION; DIVERSITY; DATABASES; HABITATS; PATTERNS;
   IMPACTS; EROSION
AB 1. Plant communities of coastal dunes are highly biodiverse and greatly valued for the services they provide, yet they are also threatened by global change and are often neglected in conservation planning. To determine the long-term effectiveness of conservation actions on Mediterranean coastal dunes, here we focus on Italy's coastline and (i) assess how the vegetation cover of the major psammophilous habitats and species has changed since the 1960s, (ii) identify which ecological strategies have been most successful in the face of global change and (iii) evaluate the efficacy of the protected areas network for safeguarding plant communities of coastal dunes.
   2. We compiled 2583 geo-located vegetation releves spanning over half a century and covering the entire length of Italy's sandy coastline. Using this data base, we developed statistical models to test whether the vegetation cover of both individual species and habitats has changed over time. We then tested whether species-level changes in vegetation cover through time could be explained by species' functional traits and ecological strategy. Finally, we assessed the efficacy of current conservation measures by exploring how vegetation cover responded following the expansion of the protected areas network.
   3. Our results indicate that, where protected, plant communities have generally increased in vegetation cover in recent years. The strongest increase in cover occurred in the wooded dune habitats, where late-successional, tall-growing and large-seeded species show the clearest signs of recovery. However, this has come in part at the expense of dune grasslands, which thrive under natural disturbance and have declined since the 1960s. The Natura 2000 network seems to have played a central role in this recovery process, as the cumulative coastal land area under protection has tripled since the network was first established.
   4. Synthesis and applications. Our results suggest that protected areas can play an important role in safeguarding coastal dune plant communities against land-use transformations. In this context, functional traits can be a powerful tool in guiding conservation planning, helping to identify groups of species most at risk of population declines. Nonetheless, future conservation interventions need to be mindful to ensure that the natural disturbance regime of dune ecosystems is not disrupted.
RI Jucker, Tommaso/S-4724-2017; Acosta, Alicia T. R,/E-3653-2012; Carboni,
   Marta/A-2658-2012
OI Jucker, Tommaso/0000-0002-0751-6312; Acosta, Alicia T.
   R,/0000-0001-6572-3187; Carboni, Marta/0000-0002-9348-4758
TC 4
Z9 5
SN 0021-8901
EI 1365-2664
PD OCT
PY 2016
VL 53
IS 5
BP 1533
EP 1542
DI 10.1111/1365-2664.12684
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000387773000025
ER

PT J
AU Roy-Bolduc, A
   Laliberte, E
   Boudreau, S
   Hijri, M
AF Roy-Bolduc, Alice
   Laliberte, Etienne
   Boudreau, Stephane
   Hijri, Mohamed
TI Strong linkage between plant and soil fungal communities along a
   successional coastal dune system
SO FEMS MICROBIOLOGY ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE 454-sequencing; coastal sand dunes; plant-soil feedback; soil fungal
   community; plant nutrient acquisition; ecological succession
ID SPECIES RICHNESS; MICROBIAL COMMUNITIES; TRAIT DISTRIBUTIONS; DIVERSITY;
   GRADIENT; IDENTIFICATION; FOREST; PRODUCTIVITY; FEEDBACKS; PRIMERS
AB Complex interactions between plants and soil microorganisms drive key ecosystem and community properties such as productivity and diversity. In nutrient-poor systems such as sand dunes, plant traits and fungal symbioses related to nutrient acquisition can strongly influence vegetation dynamics. We investigated plant and fungal communities in a relic foredune plain located on an archipelago in Qu,bec, Canada. We detected distinct communities across the edaphic and successional gradient. Our results showed a clear increase in plant species richness, as well as in the diversity of nutrient-acquisition strategies. We also found a strong correlation between aboveground vegetation and soil fungal communities, and both responded similarly to soil physicochemical properties. Soil pH influenced the composition of plant and fungal communities, and could act as an important environmental filter along this relic foredune plain. The increasing functional diversity in plant nutrient-acquisition strategies across the gradient might favor resource partitioning and facilitation among co-occurring plant species. The coordinated changes in soil microbial and plant communities highlight the importance of aboveground-belowground linkages and positive biotic interactions during ecological succession in nutrient-poor environments.Strong correlation between vegetation and soil fungal communities, similar responses to soil properties, and increasing diversity of plant nutrient-acquisition strategies were revealed along a coastal dune successional and edaphic gradient.Strong correlation between vegetation and soil fungal communities, similar responses to soil properties, and increasing diversity of plant nutrient-acquisition strategies were revealed along a coastal dune successional and edaphic gradient.
RI Laliberte, Etienne/B-6855-2008
OI Laliberte, Etienne/0000-0002-3167-2622; Hijri,
   Mohamed/0000-0001-6112-8372
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0168-6496
EI 1574-6941
PD OCT
PY 2016
VL 92
IS 10
AR fiw156
DI 10.1093/femsec/fiw156
SC Microbiology
UT WOS:000386074400012
PM 27411980
ER

PT J
AU Allen, JL
   Lendemer, JC
AF Allen, Jessica L.
   Lendemer, James C.
TI Quantifying the impacts of sea-level rise on coastal biodiversity: A
   case study on lichens in the mid-Atlantic Coast of eastern North America
SO BIOLOGICAL CONSERVATION
DT Article
DE Conservation; Coastal ecosystem; Species distribution modeling;
   Symbiosis
ID SPECIES GEOGRAPHIC DISTRIBUTIONS; CLIMATE-CHANGE; UNITED-STATES;
   DISTRIBUTION MODELS; DIVERSITY; COMMUNITIES; INDICATORS; FOREST; TRAITS;
   ENVIRONMENT
AB Preliminary, large-scale assessments of global sea-level rise (SLR) have predicted significant impacts to coastal and island biodiversity. Region-specific estimates of SLR impacts that incorporate accurate species distributions and local rates of SLR are now required for effective conservation planning. Here we use a dataset of >13,000 occurrence records for lichens, obligate symbiotic fungi, in the Mid-Atlantic Coastal Plain of eastern North America to model distributions of 193 species. The resulting models were used to quantify the amount of each species' distribution that is occupied by unsuitable land use types, along with the potential area that will be lost to SLR. We show that species have likely already lost an average of 32% of their distributional area to development and agriculture, and are predicted to lose an average of 12.4 and 33.7% of their distributional area with one foot (similar to 0.3 m) and six feet (similar to 1.8 m) of SLR, respectively. Functional and taxonomic groups were compared to identify specific effects of SLR. We show that species reproducing with symbiotic propagules have significantly larger distributions than species that reproduce sexually with fungal spores alone, and that the sexually reproducing species are predicted to lose greater distributional area to SLR. Cladonia species occupy significantly less area in the MACP than Parmotrema species and are predicted to lose more of their distributions to SLR. We further examined patterns of total species diversity and found that the area with the highest diversity is the Dare Peninsula in North Carolina, which is also predicted to lose the most land area to SLR. The workflow established here is flexible and applicable to estimating SLR impacts worldwide and can provide essential insights for local conservation planning. (C) 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
OI Lendemer, James/0000-0003-1186-0711
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 0006-3207
EI 1873-2917
PD OCT
PY 2016
VL 202
BP 119
EP 126
DI 10.1016/j.biocon.2016.08.031
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000386318400013
ER

PT J
AU Loewen, CJG
   Vinebrooke, RD
AF Loewen, Charlie J. G.
   Vinebrooke, Rolf D.
TI Regional diversity reverses the negative impacts of an alien predator on
   local species-poor communities
SO ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE biodiversity-ecosystem functioning; biotic resistance; climate change;
   functional structure; metacommunity; mountain lakes; multiple stressors;
   predator-prey interactions; spatial insurance effects; sportfish; trait
   analysis; zooplankton
ID ZOOPLANKTON COMMUNITIES; BODY-SIZE; CRUSTACEAN ZOOPLANKTON; ECOSYSTEM
   FUNCTION; SPATIAL INSURANCE; CURRENT KNOWLEDGE; PLANT INVASIONS;
   CLIMATE-CHANGE; FOOD WEBS; DISPERSAL
AB Species diversity is often an implicit source of biological insurance for communities against the impacts of novel perturbations, such as the introduction of an invasive species. High environmental heterogeneity (e.g., a mountainous gradient) is expected to beget greater regional species diversity and variation in functional traits related to environmental tolerances. Thus, heterogeneous metacommunities are expected to provide more tolerant colonists that buffer stressed local communities in the absence of dispersal limitation. We tested the hypothesis that importation of a regional zooplankton pool assembled from a diverse array of lakes and ponds lessens the impacts of a novel predator on local species-poor alpine communities by increasing response diversity (i.e., diversity of tolerances to environmental change) as mediated by variation in functional traits related to predator evasion. We also tested whether impacts varied with temperature, as warming may modify (e.g., dampen or amplify) invasion effects. An eight-week factorial experiment ([fishless vs. introduced Oncorhynchus mykiss (rainbow trout)]x[ambient temperature vs. heated]x[local vs. local+regional species pool]) was conducted using 32 1,000-L mesocosms. Associations between experimental treatments and species functional traits were tested by R-mode linked to Q-mode (RLQ) and fourth-corner analyses. Although the introduced predator suppressed local species richness and community biomass, colonization by several montane zooplankters reversed these negative effects, resulting in increased species diversity and production. Invasion resistance was unaffected by higher temperatures, which failed to elicit any significance impacts on the community. We discovered that the smaller body sizes of imported species drove functional overcompensation (i.e., increased production) in invaded communities. The observed ecological surprise showed how regionally sourced biodiversity from a highly heterogeneous landscape can offset, and even reverse, the local negative impacts of an invasive species. Further, prey body size was found to be a keyspecies trait mediating the ecological impacts of the aquatic invasive predator. Our study highlights the novel application of a functional approach to understanding the impacts of biological invasions, using species traits that pertain directly to potential responses to exotic species.
OI Loewen, Charlie/0000-0002-4389-4134
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 0012-9658
EI 1939-9170
PD OCT
PY 2016
VL 97
IS 10
BP 2740
EP 2749
DI 10.1002/ecy.1485
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000386088000020
PM 27859107
ER

PT J
AU Macnaughton, CJ
   Senay, C
   Dolinsek, I
   Bourque, G
   Maheu, A
   Lanthier, G
   Harvey-Lavoie, S
   Asselin, J
   Legendre, P
   Boisclair, D
AF Macnaughton, Camille J.
   Senay, Caroline
   Dolinsek, Ivan
   Bourque, Guillaume
   Maheu, Audrey
   Lanthier, Gabriel
   Harvey-Lavoie, Simonne
   Asselin, Joanie
   Legendre, Pierre
   Boisclair, Daniel
TI Using fish guilds to assess community responses to temperature and flow
   regimes in unregulated and regulated Canadian rivers
SO FRESHWATER BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE ecological traits; flow indices; regulated rivers; thermal indices;
   trait-environment relationships
ID THERMAL REGIMES; HYDROLOGIC ALTERATION; FUNCTIONAL GUILDS; BIOTIC
   INTEGRITY; SPECIES TRAITS; STREAM; ASSEMBLAGES; MANAGEMENT; WATER; MODEL
AB 1. Hydropower currently accounts for 63% of Canada's total electricity generation and is bound to increase with the energy demands of a growing population. With damming and flow regulation known as major threats to aquatic biodiversity and river and floodplain habitats, an improved understanding of the specific impacts of river regulation is needed for the proper management of these systems.
   2. Although interactions among river flow and thermal regimes have been described in the literature, their concurrent influence on fish guild responses has yet to be analysed for temperate rivers. Such an analysis may be used to identify the ecological traits linked with the flow and thermal variables reflecting river regulation.
   3. Extensive field surveys were conducted across 25 unregulated and regulated rivers to estimate fish species density and biomass. Fish guild models were developed to characterise morphologic, trophic, reproductive, habitat preferences and behavioural traits, as well as phylogenetic associations. To characterise ecologically relevant components of the flow and thermal regimes of rivers, we calculated indices based on the magnitude, frequency, duration, timing and rate of change in each driver. Model relationships between fish biomass and density estimates were then run using redundancy analyses (RDA) on each type of guild and dominant patterns of flow and thermal variability.
   4. Variables representing the magnitude of summer temperatures and intra-annual flow variability were consistently selected as independent drivers of fish guild responses (>86% of RDA models), clearly showing the importance of integrating thermal regimes in current river hydro-ecological studies.
   5. Fish guild density and biomass were significantly explained (R-Adj(2) = 25-44%) and predicted (R-CV(2) = 35-76%) by flow and thermal variables characterising regimes across unregulated and regulated rivers, whereas total fish density and biomass were not. Fish guild models based on traitenvironmental relationships performed better than those based on phylogeny. Our results also showed that the models describing habitat and trophic guilds had the greatest explanatory power (R-Adj(2) = 0.44 and R-Adj(2) = 0.41 respectively).
   6. This study identified differences in guild trait-environment relationships across rivers and the guilds most susceptible to changes in flow and temperature conditions resulting from river regulation. In particular, more constant summer temperatures and lower flow variability favoured habitat and trophic guilds over morphologic, reproductive and behavioural guilds.
   7. Our results showed that maintaining particular aspects of the flow and thermal regime may be important for ensuring the presence of certain guilds in temperate rivers.
RI Legendre, Pierre/C-8279-2013
OI Legendre, Pierre/0000-0002-3838-3305
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 0046-5070
EI 1365-2427
PD OCT
PY 2016
VL 61
IS 10
BP 1759
EP 1772
DI 10.1111/fwb.12815
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000386021300012
ER

PT J
AU Mutshinda, CM
   Finkel, ZV
   Widdicombe, CE
   Irwin, AJ
AF Mutshinda, Crispin M.
   Finkel, Zoe V.
   Widdicombe, Claire E.
   Irwin, Andrew J.
TI Ecological equivalence of species within phytoplankton functional groups
SO FUNCTIONAL ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE demographic stochasticity; diatoms; dinoflagellates; English Channel;
   functional types; neutral model; time series; traits
ID WESTERN ENGLISH-CHANNEL; HARMFUL ALGAL BLOOMS; NEUTRAL THEORY; COMMUNITY
   STRUCTURE; ECOSYSTEM DYNAMICS; MARINE ECOSYSTEM; NORTH-ATLANTIC;
   CELL-SIZE; OCEAN; PLANKTON
AB There are tens of thousands of species of phytoplankton found throughout the tree of life. Despite this diversity, phytoplankton are often aggregated into a few functional groups according to metabolic traits or biogeochemical role. We investigate the extent to which phytoplankton species dynamics are neutral within functional groups. Seasonal dynamics in many regions of the ocean are known to affect phytoplankton at the functional group level leading to largely predictable patterns of seasonal succession. It is much more difficult to make general statements about the dynamics of individual species. We use a 7-year time series at station L4 in the Western English Channel with 57 diatom and 17 dinoflagellate species enumerated weekly to test whether the abundance of diatom and dinoflagellate species varies randomly within their functional group envelope or whether each species is driven uniquely by external factors. We show that the total biomass of the diatom and dinoflagellate functional groups is well predicted by irradiance and temperature and quantify trait values governing the growth rate of both functional groups. The biomass dynamics of the functional groups are not neutral and each has their own distinct responses to environmental forcing. Compared to dinoflagellates, diatoms have faster growth rates and grow faster under lower irradiance, cooler temperatures, and higher nutrient conditions. The biomass of most species varies randomly within their functional group biomass envelope, most of the time. As a consequence, modellers will find it difficult to predict the biomass of most individual species. Our analysis supports the approach of using a single set of traits for a functional group and suggests that it should be possible to determine these traits from natural communities.
TC 9
Z9 10
SN 0269-8463
EI 1365-2435
PD OCT
PY 2016
VL 30
IS 10
BP 1714
EP 1722
DI 10.1111/1365-2435.12641
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000385511500011
ER

PT J
AU Le Gac, M
   Metegnier, G
   Chomerat, N
   Malestroit, P
   Quere, J
   Bouchez, O
   Siano, R
   Destombe, C
   Guillou, L
   Chapelle, A
AF Le Gac, Mickael
   Metegnier, Gabriel
   Chomerat, Nicolas
   Malestroit, Pascale
   Quere, Julien
   Bouchez, Olivier
   Siano, Raffaele
   Destombe, Christophe
   Guillou, Laure
   Chapelle, Annie
TI Evolutionary processes and cellular functions underlying divergence in
   Alexandrium minutum
SO MOLECULAR ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE Dinoflagellates; harmful algal blooms; Populations Genomics;
   Pseudocryptic species; speciation
ID GENETIC DIVERSITY; POPULATION GENOMICS; POSITIVE SELECTION;
   MARINE-SPECIATION; PARADOX; INTROGRESSION; PLANKTON; DIATOM;
   DIFFERENTIATION; HITCHHIKING
AB Understanding divergence in the highly dispersive and seemingly homogeneous pelagic environment for organisms living as free drifters in the water column remains a challenge. Here, we analysed the transcriptome-wide mRNA sequences, as well as the morphology of 18 strains of Alexandrium minutum, a dinoflagellate responsible for harmful algal blooms worldwide, to investigate the functional bases of a divergence event. Analysis of the joint site frequency spectrum (JSFS) pointed towards an ancestral divergence in complete isolations followed by a secondary contact resulting in gene flow between the two diverging groups, but heterogeneous across sites. The sites displaying fixed SNPs were associated with a highly restricted gene flow and a strong overrepresentation of nonsynonymous polymorphism, suggesting the importance of selective pressures as drivers of the divergence. The most divergent transcripts were homologs to genes involved in calcium/potassium fluxes across the membrane, calcium transduction signal and saxitoxin production. The implication of these results in terms of ecological divergence and build-up of reproductive isolation is discussed. Dinoflagellates are especially difficult to study in the field at the ecological level due to their small size and the dynamic nature of their natural environment, but also at the genomic level due to their huge and complex genome and the absence of closely related model organism. This study illustrates the possibility to identify the traits of primary importance in ecology and evolution starting from high-throughput sequencing data, even for such organisms.
OI Guillou, Laure/0000-0003-1032-7958
TC 5
Z9 5
SN 0962-1083
EI 1365-294X
PD OCT
PY 2016
VL 25
IS 20
BP 5129
EP 5143
DI 10.1111/mec.13815
SC Biochemistry & Molecular Biology; Environmental Sciences & Ecology;
   Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000385611300010
PM 27543851
ER

PT J
AU Weigel, B
   Blenckner, T
   Bonsdorff, E
AF Weigel, Benjamin
   Blenckner, Thorsten
   Bonsdorff, Erik
TI Maintained functional diversity in benthic communities in spite of
   diverging functional identities
SO OIKOS
DT Article
ID BALTIC SEA; CLIMATE-CHANGE; ECOSYSTEM PROCESSES; BRACKISH WATERS;
   NORTH-SEA; TRAITS; ZOOBENTHOS; DYNAMICS; INDEXES; SYSTEM
AB Ecological studies based on time-series often investigate community changes centered on species abundance or biomass but rarely expose the consequential functional aspects underlying such changes. Functional diversity measures have proven to be more accurate predictors for ecosystem functioning than traditional taxonomic approaches and hence gained much attention. There are only limited studies available that analyse the functional implications behind decadal changes of entire communities. We studied zoobenthic communities of two habitats, sheltered and exposed, of a coastal system subject to contrasting changes in community composition over the past four decades. Besides eutrophication and climate-related impacts, the system has been invaded by a non-native polycheate Marenzelleria spp., adding altered functional properties to the communities. The functional dispersion (FDis) metric was used as a measure for comparing the functional diversity of the contrasting habitats, with special focus on the role of Marenzelleria for the entire communities. We highlight changes in the functional identity of the communities, expressed as community-weighted means of trait expression (CWM), using multivariate techniques, and investigate the relationship between taxonomic and functional changes. Despite contrasting community developments in the two habitats, with characteristics traditionally suggesting different environmental quality, we found that the FDis in both habitats remained similar and increased with the introduction of Marenzelleria. Although showing maintained functional diversity across time and space, the functional identity (CWM) of communities changed irrespective of taxonomical differences. Examples include inter alia alterations in palatability proxies, feeding position and sediment transportation types, indicating changed functionality of zoobenthos in coastal systems. We show, when focussing on qualitative functional changes of communities, it is important to evaluate the underlying functional identity, and not only rely on measures of the diversity of functions per se, as the quality indication of expressed functional traits can be concealed when using multi-functionality approaches.
OI Blenckner, Thorsten/0000-0002-6991-7680; Weigel,
   Benjamin/0000-0003-2302-5529
TC 7
Z9 7
SN 0030-1299
EI 1600-0706
PD OCT
PY 2016
VL 125
IS 10
BP 1421
EP 1433
DI 10.1111/oik.02894
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000385615100005
ER

PT J
AU Pavel, B
   Alexandra, R
   Fedor, C
   Ciamporova-Zat'ovicova, Z
AF Pavel, Beracko
   Alexandra, Roganska
   Fedor, Ciampor, Jr.
   Ciamporova-Zat'ovicova, Zuzana
TI Catchment land use as a predictor of the macroinvertebrate community
   changes between inlet and outlet of small water dams
SO ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING AND ASSESSMENT
DT Article
DE Water reservoir; Land cover; Species richness; Functional diversity;
   Species traits
ID BENTHIC-MACROINVERTEBRATES; SPECIES TRAITS; RUNNING WATERS; INVERTEBRATE
   COMMUNITIES; BIOTIC HOMOGENIZATION; SEASONAL-VARIATION; STREAM
   METABOLISM; FISH ASSEMBLAGES; RIVER; DIVERSITY
AB Changes in land use practices have affected the integrity and the quality of stream water worldwide. Effective catchment management, in terms of land use alteration, depends on our ability to quantify ecologically significant changes and to discriminate among varying levels of impact. In this study, we assessed the structural and functional changes upstream and downstream of eight small water reservoirs in western Slovakia and the relationship between these changes and shifts in physicochemical parameters as a consequence of stream damming and catchment land use. Dams were categorized into two groups, the first with both inlet and outlet situated in deforested and agricultural landscape and the second with inlet flowing through natural and forested landscape, while outlet is situated in deforested and urban region. Using a "between-groups" principal components analysis and a "between-groups" fuzzy principal components analysis, we found significant differences in structural and functional composition of macroinvertebrate communities between inlets with forested catchment and outlets flowing through agricultural, urban landscape. The structural dissimilarity is best explained by the physicochemical and biological characteristics of the aquatic environment, while functional variation of communities is best explained by land use of an area surrounding the stream. The distance in structural and functional community composition between inlet and outlet was linked with difference in environmental conditions between these habitats. The change of structural community composition significantly reflected shift in the water temperature and phosphorus concentration, while the change of functional community composition was determined by change of nutrient concentrations (e.g., PO4, NO3, NH4) and pH.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0167-6369
EI 1573-2959
PD OCT
PY 2016
VL 188
IS 10
AR 550
DI 10.1007/s10661-016-5552-4
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000384330800008
PM 27600116
ER

PT J
AU Murray, AE
   Rack, FR
   Zook, R
   Williams, MJM
   Higham, ML
   Broe, M
   Kaufmann, RS
   Daly, M
AF Murray, Alison E.
   Rack, Frank R.
   Zook, Robert
   Williams, Michael J. M.
   Higham, Mary L.
   Broe, Michael
   Kaufmann, Ronald S.
   Daly, Marymegan
TI Microbiome Composition and Diversity of the Ice-Dwelling Sea Anemone,
   Edwardsiella andrillae
SO INTEGRATIVE AND COMPARATIVE BIOLOGY
DT Article
ID CORAL LOPHELIA-PERTUSA; BACTERIAL COMMUNITIES;
   ANTHOPLEURA-ELEGANTISSIMA; GENE-EXPRESSION; ROSS SEA; EVOLUTION;
   ARCHAEA; IDENTIFICATION; VARIABILITY; ANTARCTICA
AB Edwardsiella andrillae is a sea anemone (Cnidaria: Anthozoa: Actiniaria) only known to live embedded in the ice at the seawater interface on the underside of the Ross Ice Shelf, Antarctica. Although the anatomy and morphological characteristics of E. andrillae have been described, the adaptations of this species to the under-ice ecosystem have yet to be examined. One feature that may be important to the physiology and ecology of E. andrillae is its microbiome, which may play a role in health and survival, as has been deduced in other metazoans, including anthozoans. Here we describe the microbiome of five specimens of E. andrillae, compare the diversity we recovered to that known for temperate anemones and another Antarctic cnidarian, and consider the phylogenetic and functional implications of microbial diversity for these animals. The E. andrillae microbiome was relatively low in diversity, with seven phyla detected, yet included substantial phylogenetic novelty. Among the five anemones investigated, the distribution of microbial taxa varied; this trait appears to be shared by many anthozoans. Most importantly, specimens either appeared to be dominated by Proteobacteria-affiliated members or by deeply branching Tenericute sequences. There were few closely related sequence types that were common to temperate and Antarctic sea anemone microbiomes, the exception being an Acinetobacter-related representative. Similar observations were made between microbes associated with E. andrillae and an Antarctic soft coral; however, there were several closely-related, low abundance Gammaproteobacteria in both Antarctic microbiomes, particularly from the soft coral, that are also commonly detected in Southern Ocean seawater. Although this preliminary study leaves open many questions concerning microbiome diversity and its role in host ecology, we identify major lineages of microbes (e.g., diverse deep-branching Alphaproteobacteria, Epsilonproteobacteria, and divergent Tenericutes affiliates) that may play critical roles, and we highlight the current understanding and the need for future studies of sea anemone-microbiome relationships.
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 1540-7063
EI 1557-7023
PD OCT
PY 2016
VL 56
IS 4
BP 542
EP 555
DI 10.1093/icb/icw095
SC Zoology
UT WOS:000384303700006
PM 27493149
ER

PT J
AU Schoonover, CM
   Wieker, J
   Pope, R
   Brown, C
   Cooper, E
   DeWitt, J
   Gunselman, S
   Jensen, C
   Stevens, W
   Yri, J
   Nezat, C
   Joyner-Matos, J
AF Schoonover, Cody M.
   Wieker, Jessica
   Pope, Rachelle
   Brown, Chelsea
   Cooper, Emily
   DeWitt, Jariel
   Gunselman, Samuel
   Jensen, Cory
   Stevens, Whitney
   Yri, Jenae
   Nezat, Carmen
   Joyner-Matos, Joanna
TI Development of functional trait biomarkers for trace metal exposure in
   freshwater clams (Musculium spp.)
SO COMPARATIVE BIOCHEMISTRY AND PHYSIOLOGY A-MOLECULAR & INTEGRATIVE
   PHYSIOLOGY
DT Article; Proceedings Paper
CT 2nd International Conference on Oxidative Stress in Aquatic Ecosystems
CY NOV 11-14, 2015
CL Centro Investigaciones Biologicas Noroeste, La Paz, MEXICO
HO Centro Investigaciones Biologicas Noroeste
DE Biomarker; Bivalve; Locomotion; Pollution; Reproduction; Metal
ID COEUR-DALENE RIVER; CORBICULA-FLUMINEA; HEAVY-METALS; FINGERNAIL CLAM;
   ASIATIC CLAM; SUBCELLULAR COMPARTMENTALIZATION; BIOCHEMICAL-COMPOSITION;
   SPHAERIUM-TRANSVERSUM; AQUATIC INVERTEBRATES; REPRODUCTIVE ACTIVITY
AB Exposure to trace metals typically causes oxidative stress; these consequences are better-characterized in estuarine and marine species than in freshwater species. How cellular-level responses to metal pollution influence whole-organism and population-level traits is poorly understood. We tested whether exposure to single metals (zinc and cadmium) and to metal mixtures (water in equilibrium with sediment from a highly polluted lake) alters two ecologically-relevant traits in freshwater clams, locomotion and reproduction. Fingernail clams (Musculium spp.) from unimpacted habitats were exposed to single metals and the metal mixture for up to 49 days. The single metal doses (<= 5 mg/L Zn and <= 20 mu g/L Cd) were not toxicologically meaningful as clam survival, burial, and climbing activity did not differ across treatments. Water in equilibrium with the lake sediment contained cadmium, copper, lead, and zinc. Clams exposed to this metal mixture had decreased climbing activity but no change in burial activity. Metal-exposed clams had lower fecundity (number of shelled juveniles extruded by adult clams) and patterns in metal accumulation corresponded with lake sediment dose and clam activity. In contrast to the functional traits, stress protein expression and whole-clam glycogen content did not vary across treatment groups. These results indicate that fingernail clams of the genus Musculium are appropriate for development as sentinel species for metal pollution and can serve as a model for determining how metal pollution alters metabolic allocation patterns in freshwater organisms. (C) 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 1095-6433
EI 1531-4332
PD OCT
PY 2016
VL 200
BP 21
EP 34
DI 10.1016/j.cbpa.2016.04.012
SC Biochemistry & Molecular Biology; Physiology; Zoology
UT WOS:000383936700004
PM 27085374
ER

PT J
AU Rolo, V
   Olivier, P
   van Aarde, R
AF Rolo, Victor
   Olivier, Pieter
   van Aarde, Rudolph
TI Seeded pioneer die-offs reduce the functional trait space of new-growth
   coastal dune forests
SO FOREST ECOLOGY AND MANAGEMENT
DT Article
DE Functional diversity; Forest restoration; Canopy gaps; Environmental
   filtering; Hemispherical photographs; Community assembly
ID SPECIES PLANTATIONS; ECONOMICS SPECTRUM; ECOSYSTEM SERVICES; CANOPY
   GAPS; SUCCESSION; DIVERSITY; COMMUNITY; RESTORATION; MECHANISMS;
   WORLDWIDE
AB The planting or seeding of pioneer species to promote restoration apparently contributes little to the establishment of late-successional species, despite the common assumption that they facilitate forest regeneration. We evaluate the consequences of planting pioneers for coastal dune restoration by measuring plant traits (specific leaf area, wood density, delta C-13 and maximum plant height), species composition and canopy openness in three rehabilitating forests of different ages, where a pioneer species (Acacia karroo) was seeded, and one undisturbed old-growth forest. We surveyed woody species composition in 2010 and in 2015 to assess how changes in A. karroo influences community structure of rehabilitating forest. Our results showed that the number of adult individuals of A. karroo decreased progressively with forest age, indicating that the demise of individuals of A. karroo opens canopy gaps in rehabilitating sites. This accorded with a significantly higher variation of canopy openness levels in the oldest rehabilitating site. Rehabilitating sites tended to progress towards a reduced trait space as they aged, contrasting with the old-growth forest that showed an expanded trait space. Communities located at high levels of canopy openness were dominated by species with lower values of specific leaf area and wood density, indicative of acclimation to high light conditions and fast-growing strategies. Our results suggest that changes in light availability due to canopy gap formation, can act as an environmental filter which may deflect forest regeneration trajectories. We show that coupling a trait-based approach with environmental measurements can give insight in regeneration trajectories of rehabilitating sites and, therefore, better inform restoration practices. Preventing the formation of large canopy gaps in restoration programs using pioneers as a regeneration pathway may facilitate the natural recovery of degraded forest. (C) 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
RI Rolo, Victor/H-1713-2016
OI Rolo, Victor/0000-0001-5854-9512
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 0378-1127
EI 1872-7042
PD OCT 1
PY 2016
VL 377
BP 26
EP 35
DI 10.1016/j.foreco.2016.06.039
SC Forestry
UT WOS:000381843400003
ER

PT J
AU Feakins, SJ
   Peters, T
   Wu, MS
   Shenkin, A
   Salinas, N
   Girardin, CAJ
   Bentley, LP
   Blonder, B
   Enquist, BJ
   Martin, RE
   Asner, GP
   Malhi, Y
AF Feakins, Sarah J.
   Peters, Tom
   Wu, Mong Sin
   Shenkin, Alexander
   Salinas, Norma
   Girardin, Cecile A. J.
   Bentley, Lisa Patrick
   Blonder, Benjamin
   Enquist, Brian J.
   Martin, Roberta E.
   Asner, Gregory P.
   Malhi, Yadvinder
TI Production of leaf wax n-alkanes across a tropical forest elevation
   transect
SO ORGANIC GEOCHEMISTRY
DT Article
DE Amazon; Andes; CHAMBASA; Leaf wax; Peru; NPP
ID HYDROGEN-ISOTOPIC COMPOSITION; SOUTH-AMERICAN TROPICS; PALEOCLIMATE
   RECONSTRUCTION; ECONOMICS SPECTRUM; AMAZONIAN FORESTS; ECUADORIAN ANDES;
   THERMAL MAXIMUM; CARBON; BIOMARKERS; SURFACE
AB Waxy compounds form the boundary layer of the living leaf and contribute biomarkers to soils, and lake and marine sediments. Cataloging the variation in leaf wax traits between species and across environmental gradients may contribute to the understanding of plant functional processes in modern ecosystems, as well as to calibration efforts supporting reconstruction of past ecosystems and environments from the sedimentary archives of leaf wax biomarkers. Towards these goals, we have surveyed the distributions of leaf wax n-alkanes in trees from the lowland tropical rainforest (TR) and montane cloud forest (TMCF) of Peru. Molecular abundances were quantified via gas chromatography flame ionization detection (GC-FID) for 632 individuals, 152 species, 99 genera and 51 families across 9 forest plots spanning 0.2-3.6 km elevation. We found the expected abundance distributions; for example, they were dominated by long chain, odd numbered n-alkanes, especially C-29 and C-31. New observations included a tendency to increasing total alkane concentration at higher elevation. We propose that the well known leaf economic strategy to increase leaf mass per unit area with elevation, provides a theoretical basis for understanding the increase in leaf wax n-alkane abundance with elevation: we infer an increased investment in foliar defense associated with increased leaf lifespan and in response to environmental pressures including cloud immersion and declining temperature. Furthermore, we combined measurements of n-alkane concentration with estimates of forest productivity to provide new ways to quantify ecosystem-scale forest alkane productivity. We introduce a new concept of n-alkane net primary productivity (NPPalk; the product of alkane concentration and leaf NPP) and find that alkane productivity estimates range from 300 to 5000 g C/ha/yr, associated with ecological and environmental changes across the elevation profile. (C) 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
RI Feakins, Sarah/K-4149-2012; Shenkin, Alexander/L-1653-2017
OI Feakins, Sarah/0000-0003-3434-2423; Shenkin,
   Alexander/0000-0003-2358-9367; Salinas, Norma/0000-0001-9941-2109
TC 17
Z9 17
SN 0146-6380
PD OCT
PY 2016
VL 100
BP 89
EP 100
DI 10.1016/j.orggeochem.2016.07.004
SC Geochemistry & Geophysics
UT WOS:000381909900009
ER

PT J
AU Morozov, AY
   Kuzenkov, OA
AF Morozov, Andrew Yu.
   Kuzenkov, Oleg. A.
TI Towards developing a general framework for modelling vertical migration
   in zooplankton
SO JOURNAL OF THEORETICAL BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE Infinite-dimensional traits; Population fitness; Predator-prey model;
   Selection; Pontryagin's maximum principle
ID ADAPTIVE SIGNIFICANCE; FOOD AVAILABILITY; LIGHT-INTENSITY; DYNAMICS;
   SYSTEMS; CONSEQUENCES; POPULATION; PREDATION; HISTORY; GROWTH
AB Diel vertical migration (DVM) of zooplankton is a widespread phenomenon in both oceans and lakes, and is generally considered to be the largest synchronized movement of biomass on Earth. Most existing mathematical models of DVM are based on the assumption that animals maximize a certain criterion such as the expected reproductive value, the venturous revenue, the ratio of energy gain/mortality or some predator avoidance function when choosing their instantaneous depth. The major shortcoming of this general point of view is that the predicted DVM may be strongly affected by a subjective choice of a particular optimization criterion. Here we argue that the optimal strategy of DVM can be unambiguously obtained as an outcome of selection in the underlying equations of genotype/traits frequency dynamics. Using this general paradigm, we explore the optimal strategy for the migration across different depths by zooplankton grazers throughout the day. To illustrate our ideas we consider four generic DVM models, each making different assumptions on the population dynamics of zooplankton, and demonstrate that in each model we need to maximize a particular functional to find the optimal strategy. Surprisingly, patterns of DVM obtained for different models greatly differ in terms of their parameters dependence. We then show that the infinite dimensional trait space of different zooplankton trajectories can be projected onto a low dimensional space of generalized parameters and the genotype evolution dynamics can be easily followed using this low-dimensional space. Using this space of generalized parameters we explore the influence of mutagenesis on evolution of DVM, and we show that strong mutagenesis allows the coexistence of an infinitely large number of strategies whereas for weak mutagenesis the selection results in the extinction of most strategies, with the surviving strategies all staying close to the optimal strategy in the corresponding mutagenesis-free system. (C) 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
RI Kuzenkov, Oleg/G-9720-2017
OI Kuzenkov, Oleg/0000-0001-9407-0517
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 0022-5193
EI 1095-8541
PD SEP 21
PY 2016
VL 405
SI SI
BP 17
EP 28
DI 10.1016/j.jtbi.2016.01.011
SC Life Sciences & Biomedicine - Other Topics; Mathematical & Computational
   Biology
UT WOS:000381447600003
PM 26804642
ER

PT J
AU Wagner, H
   Fanesi, A
   Wilhelm, C
AF Wagner, Heiko
   Fanesi, Andrea
   Wilhelm, Christian
TI Freshwater phytoplankton responses to global warming
SO JOURNAL OF PLANT PHYSIOLOGY
DT Article
DE Carbon allocation; freshwater ecosystems; global warming;
   photosynthesis; primary production; temperature
ID FATTY-ACID-COMPOSITION; HARMFUL CYANOBACTERIAL BLOOMS; CLIMATE-CHANGE;
   MARINE-PHYTOPLANKTON; GROWTH-RATE; MACROMOLECULAR-COMPOSITION;
   CHLAMYDOMONAS-REINHARDTII; CONCENTRATING MECHANISMS;
   TEMPERATURE-DEPENDENCE; CHEMICAL-COMPOSITION
AB Global warming alters species composition and function of freshwater ecosystems. However, the impact of temperature on primary productivity is not sufficiently understood and water quality models need to be improved in order to assess the quantitative and qualitative changes of aquatic communities. On the basis of experimental data, we demonstrate that the commonly used photosynthetic and water chemistry parameters alone are not sufficient for modeling phytoplankton growth under changing temperature regimes. We present some new aspects of the acclimation process with respect to temperature and how contrasting responses may be explained by a more complete physiological knowledge of the energy flow from photons to new biomass. We further suggest including additional bio-markers/traits for algal growth such as carbon allocation patterns to increase the explanatory power of such models. Although carbon allocation patterns are promising and functional cellular traits for growth prediction under different nutrient and light conditions, their predictive power still waits to be tested with respect to temperature. A great challenge for the near future will be the prediction of primary production efficiencies under the global change scenario using a uniform model for phytoplankton assemblages. (C) 2016 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 0176-1617
EI 1618-1328
PD SEP 20
PY 2016
VL 203
BP 127
EP 134
DI 10.1016/j.jplph.2016.05.018
SC Plant Sciences
UT WOS:000385038100012
PM 27344409
ER

PT J
AU Mindel, BL
   Neat, FC
   Trueman, CN
   Webb, TJ
   Blanchard, JL
AF Mindel, Beth L.
   Neat, Francis C.
   Trueman, Clive N.
   Webb, Thomas J.
   Blanchard, Julia L.
TI Functional, size and taxonomic diversity of fish along a depth gradient
   in the deep sea
SO PEERJ
DT Article
DE Bathymetry; Deep scattering layer; Environmental gradient;
   Morphometrics; Rockall Trough; Trait-based approach; Demersal fish;
   Continental slope; Biodiversity; Functional role
ID BODY-SIZE; COMMUNITY ECOLOGY; SPECIES RICHNESS; LIMITING SIMILARITY;
   CELTIC SEA; TRAITS; OCEAN; BIODIVERSITY; PATTERNS; PREY
AB Biodiversity is well studied in ecology and the concept has been developed to include traits of species, rather than solely taxonomy, to better reflect the functional diversity of a system. The deep sea provides a natural environmental gradient within which to study changes in different diversity metrics, but traits of deep-sea fish are not widely known, hampering the application of functional diversity to this globally important system. We used morphological traits to determine the functional richness and functional divergence of demersal fish assemblages along the continental slope in the Northeast Atlantic, at depths of 300-2,000 m. We compared these metrics to size diversity based on individual body size and species richness. Functional richness and size diversity showed similar patterns, with the highest diversity at intermediate depths; functional divergence showed the opposite pattern, with the highest values at the shallowest and deepest parts of the study site. Species richness increased with depth. The functional implications of these patterns were deduced by examining depth-related changes in morphological traits and the dominance of feeding guilds as illustrated by stable isotope analyses. The patterns in diversity and the variation in certain morphological traits can potentially be explained by changes in the relative dominance of pelagic and benthic feeding guilds. All measures of diversity examined here suggest that the deep areas of the continental slope may be equally or more diverse than assemblages just beyond the continental shelf.
RI Trueman, Clive/E-6925-2011
OI Blanchard, Julia/0000-0003-0532-4824; Webb, Tom/0000-0003-3183-8116;
   Mindel, Beth/0000-0002-8383-0565
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 2167-8359
PD SEP 15
PY 2016
VL 4
AR e2387
DI 10.7717/peerj.2387
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000384144100003
PM 27672494
ER

PT J
AU Van Looy, K
   Floury, M
   Ferreol, M
   Prieto-Montes, M
   Souchon, Y
AF Van Looy, Kris
   Floury, Mathieu
   Ferreol, Martial
   Prieto-Montes, Marta
   Souchon, Yves
TI Long-term changes in temperate stream invertebrate communities reveal a
   synchronous trophic amplification at the turn of the millennium
SO SCIENCE OF THE TOTAL ENVIRONMENT
DT Article
DE Aquatic macroinvertebrates; Large scale; Time series; Climate change;
   Shift; Response diversity
ID FRESH-WATER ECOSYSTEMS; LARGE EUROPEAN RIVERS; CLIMATE-CHANGE;
   MACROINVERTEBRATE COMMUNITIES; DIVERSITY; BIODIVERSITY; TRAITS; TRENDS;
   FRAMEWORK; REGIONS
AB The positive effects of water quality improvement on stream biodiversity in the temperate regions are expected to be at risk with the projected climatic changes. However, the processes and mechanisms behind the predicted threats remain uncertain. From long-term series of benthic invertebrate samples from temperate rivers and streams in France, we analyzed diversity and composition shifts over time in relation to geographic elements and human stressors. Mechanisms for community changes were investigated with a trait-based analysis for the entire dataset and for a selected caddisfly community module. We observed a 42% increase in the taxonomic richness of stream invertebrate communities over the last 25 years. A gradual trend induced by water quality improvement was distinguished from a more abrupt climate change-induced shift in communities around the year 2000. Trophic amplification - the intensification of trophic interactions and pathways through the food web was identified as the mechanism behind the strong community shift. Four lines of evidence for this trophic amplification are highlighted: (i) higher dissolved oxygen concentrations indicated a shift in primary production, (ii) the trait-based analysis of entire communities showed a bottom-up food web amplification, (iii) the trait-based analysis of the community module evidenced feeding strategy shifts and increased food web interactions, and (iv) the abundance analysis of the community module showed a productivity increase. These results lend credit to persistent investments in water quality for improving stream biodiversity, and contrary to expectation, climate change impacts seem so far to have reinforced these positive effects. (C) 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
RI Van Looy, Kris/D-4928-2012
OI Van Looy, Kris/0000-0001-5436-2320
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 0048-9697
EI 1879-1026
PD SEP 15
PY 2016
VL 565
BP 481
EP 488
DI 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.04.193
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000378206300047
PM 27183462
ER

PT J
AU Carboni, M
   Zeleny, D
   Acosta, ATR
AF Carboni, Marta
   Zeleny, David
   Acosta, Alicia T. R.
TI Measuring ecological specialization along a natural stress gradient
   using a set of complementary niche breadth indices
SO JOURNAL OF VEGETATION SCIENCE
DT Article
DE Coastal dunes; Environmental gradients; Fridley's co-occurrence index;
   Functional traits; Generalist species; Grinnellian vs Eltonian
   specialization; Specialist species
ID COOCCURRENCE BASED ASSESSMENT; COASTAL SAND DUNES; FUNCTIONAL TRAITS;
   ENVIRONMENTAL GRADIENTS; PLANT-COMMUNITIES; RANGE SIZE; HOLY-GRAIL; SALT
   SPRAY; SPECIALISTS; EVOLUTION
AB Aims: Ecological specialization refers to a restricted ecological niche breadth for a species, resulting from the trade-off between range of the resources it can exploit and efficacy in exploiting a specific resource. One hypothesis predicts that specialist species should be dominant in stressful environments, whereas generalist species should be dominant at less extreme environmental gradients. An alternative hypothesis states that specialization should be favoured in stable systems, and that ecological disturbances should affect specialist species negatively. These hypotheses have been poorly tested. Mediterranean coastal dune systems are characterized by strong sea-inland environmental gradients, ideal for tackling this challenge. We ask: (1) is distribution of specialist and generalist plant species related to this gradient; and (2) do different specialization indices indicate congruent or complementary patterns?
   Location: Coastal dune systems of central Italy.
   Methods: We used data on plant species cover in 570 community plots at varying distance from the sea. We quantified species specialization, following three approaches related to resource use or to ecological impact, based on: (1) variability of measured environmental values (or a proxy); (2) variability of co-occurring species; (3) variability of community-weighted trait means. We first compared specialization indices across different habitats of the coastal dune zonation. We then analysed the patterns of variation of communities' mean specialization values along the sea-inland stress gradient. Finally, we studied congruencies and mismatches among different indices.
   Results: We found significant variation in the degree of specialization along the gradient, across several indices. Habitats closer to the sea and under greater stress held higher proportions of specialized species and had higher average specialization levels. Sheltered backdune habitats harboured both generalist and specialist species, but were dominated by generalists.
   Conclusions: We conclude that specialist species tend to dominate in the most extreme environmental conditions, but are subordinate in milder conditions. We found a certain degree of congruence among different indices, indicating that most species that are specialists in their resource use also tend to have specialized impacts in the community. Nevertheless, the indices also provided complementary information, suggesting it is important to consider multiple niche dimensions in order to assess more robust patterns of specialism and generalism.
RI Acosta, Alicia T. R,/E-3653-2012; Carboni, Marta/A-2658-2012
OI Acosta, Alicia T. R,/0000-0001-6572-3187; Carboni,
   Marta/0000-0002-9348-4758; Zeleny, David/0000-0001-5157-044X
TC 5
Z9 5
SN 1100-9233
EI 1654-1103
PD SEP
PY 2016
VL 27
IS 5
BP 892
EP 903
DI 10.1111/jvs.12413
SC Plant Sciences; Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Forestry
UT WOS:000388439400004
ER

PT J
AU Morris, A
   Guegan, JF
   Benbow, ME
   Williamson, H
   Small, PLC
   Quaye, C
   Boakye, D
   Merritt, RW
   Gozlan, RE
AF Morris, Aaron
   Guegan, Jean-Francois
   Benbow, M. Eric
   Williamson, Heather
   Small, Pamela L. C.
   Quaye, Charles
   Boakye, Daniel
   Merritt, Richard W.
   Gozlan, Rodolphe E.
TI Functional Diversity as a New Framework for Understanding the Ecology of
   an Emerging Generalist Pathogen
SO ECOHEALTH
DT Article
DE functional diversity; biodiversity; Buruli ulcer; mycobacterium;
   dilution effect
ID BURULI ULCER DISEASE; MYCOBACTERIUM-ULCERANS; INFECTIOUS-DISEASES;
   COMMUNITY COMPOSITION; SPECIES RICHNESS; MULTIPLE TRAITS; BIODIVERSITY;
   EMERGENCE; HOMOGENIZATION; URBANIZATION
AB Emerging infectious disease outbreaks are increasingly suspected to be a consequence of human pressures exerted on natural ecosystems. Previously, host taxonomic communities have been used as indicators of infectious disease emergence, and the loss of their diversity has been implicated as a driver of increased presence. The mechanistic details in how such pathogen-host systems function, however, may not always be explained by taxonomic variation or loss. Here we used machine learning and methods based on Gower's dissimilarity to quantify metrics of invertebrate functional diversity, in addition to functional groups and their taxonomic diversity at sites endemic and non-endemic for the model generalist pathogen Mycobacterium ulcerans, the causative agent of Buruli ulcer. Changes in these metrics allowed the rapid categorisation of the ecological niche of the mycobacterium's hosts and the ability to relate specific host traits to its presence in aquatic ecosystems. We found that taxonomic diversity of hosts and overall functional diversity loss and evenness had no bearing on the mycobacterium's presence, or whether the site was in an endemic area. These findings, however, provide strong evidence that generalist environmentally persistent bacteria such as M. ulcerans can be associated with specific functional traits rather than taxonomic groups of organisms, increasing our understanding of emerging disease ecology and origin.
RI Guegan, Jean-Francois/F-4346-2012
OI Guegan, Jean-Francois/0000-0002-7218-107X
TC 1
Z9 2
SN 1612-9202
EI 1612-9210
PD SEP
PY 2016
VL 13
IS 3
BP 570
EP 581
DI 10.1007/s10393-016-1140-x
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000386363400015
PM 27357080
ER

PT J
AU Schmidt, M
   Mehlhorn, M
   Fischer, MS
AF Schmidt, Manuela
   Mehlhorn, Martin
   Fischer, Martin S.
TI Shoulder girdle rotation, forelimb movement and the influence of
   carapace shape on locomotion in Testudo hermanni (Testudinidae)
SO JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE Testudines; Terrestrial locomotion; Spatio-temporal gait parameters;
   Forelimb kinematics; Shoulder girdle morphology
ID TURTLE BODY PLAN; LUNG VENTILATION; TREADMILL LOCOMOTION;
   TERRAPENE-ORNATA; CHRYSEMYS-PICTA; EVOLUTION; TORTOISE; GAITS;
   ENERGETICS; CHELONII
AB Studies into the function of structures are crucial for making connections between morphology and behaviour of organisms, but are still rare for the terrestrial Testudinidae. We investigated the kinematics of shoulder girdle and forelimb motion in Hermann's tortoise Testudo hermanni using biplanar X-ray fluoroscopy with a twofold aim: firstly, to understand how the derived shapes of shoulder girdle and carapace together influence rotation of the girdle; and, secondly, to understand how girdle rotation affects forelimb excursion. The total degree of shoulder rotation in the horizontal plane is similar to a species with a less domed shell, but because of the long and nearly vertically oriented scapular prong, shoulder girdle rotation contributes more than 30% to the horizontal arc of the humerus and nearly 40% to the rotational component of step length. The antebrachium and manus, which act as a functional unit, contribute roughly 50% to this component of the step length because of their large excursion almost parallel to the mid-sagittal plane. This large excursion is the result of the complex interplay between humerus long-axis rotation, counter-rotation of the antebrachium, and elbow flexion and extension. A significant proportion of forelimb step length results from body translation that is due to the propulsive effect of the other limbs during their stance phases. Traits that are similar to other tortoises and terrestrial or semi-aquatic turtles are the overall slow walk because of a low stride frequency, and the lateral-sequence, diagonally coupled footfall pattern with high duty factors. Intraspecific variation of carapace shape and shoulder girdle dimensions has a corresponding effect on forelimb kinematics.
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 0022-0949
EI 1477-9145
PD SEP 1
PY 2016
VL 219
IS 17
BP 2693
EP 2703
DI 10.1242/jeb.137059
SC Life Sciences & Biomedicine - Other Topics
UT WOS:000384249800019
PM 27340203
ER

PT J
AU Machado, KB
   Teresa, FB
   Vieira, LCG
   Huszar, VLD
   Nabout, JC
AF Machado, Karine Borges
   Teresa, Fabricio Barreto
   Galli Vieira, Ludgero Cardoso
   De Moraes Huszar, Vera Lucia
   Nabout, Joao Carlos
TI Comparing the effects of landscape and local environmental variables on
   taxonomic and functional composition of phytoplankton communities
SO JOURNAL OF PLANKTON RESEARCH
DT Article
DE Araguaia River; functional traits; land cover; limnological variables;
   species occurrence
ID WATERSHED LAND-USE; SPECIES COMPOSITION; FISH ASSEMBLAGES; ECOSYSTEM
   PROCESSES; BIOLOGICAL TRAITS; STREAM FISH; RIVER-BASIN; FRESH-WATER;
   DIVERSITY; ECOLOGY
AB Landscape and local environmental factors are responsible for different structuring processes in aquatic communities. In this study, we evaluated the relative influence of local and landscape variables on the taxonomic and functional composition of phytoplankton. Samples were obtained from 29 floodplain lakes located in the Tocantins-Araguaia River Basin in Brazil. Taxonomic composition was assessed using densities of species, and functional composition was assessed using three classes of functional traits: morphological, physiological and behavioral. We used a partial redundancy analysis (pRDA) to evaluate the effect of local and landscape variables on taxonomic and functional phytoplankton composition. We found higher predictive power for environmental variables at the local scale for functional composition (physiological and behavioral traits) compared with their power for taxonomic composition. However, the type of land cover did not affect either taxonomic or functional composition. Phosphorus concentration and oxygen saturation were the main factors related to physiological traits, while zooplankton density and oxygen saturation to behavioral traits. These results indicate that local environmental variables act as determinants of the taxonomic and functional composition of phytoplankton in these lakes and that functional traits may be more appropriate than taxonomic composition for evaluating relationships between these communities and environmental factors.
RI Teresa, Fabricio/F-7885-2012; Nabout, Joao/I-2828-2014; Huszar,
   Vera/J-7126-2012; Vieira, Ludgero/G-6985-2017
OI Teresa, Fabricio/0000-0002-1357-4391; Nabout, Joao/0000-0001-9102-3627; 
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 0142-7873
EI 1464-3774
PD SEP-OCT
PY 2016
VL 38
IS 5
BP 1334
EP 1346
DI 10.1093/plankt/fbw062
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000384135000016
ER

PT J
AU Matson, PG
   Ladd, TM
   Halewood, ER
   Sangodkar, RP
   Chmelka, BF
   Iglesias-Rodriguez, D
AF Matson, Paul G.
   Ladd, Tanika M.
   Halewood, Elisa R.
   Sangodkar, Rahul P.
   Chmelka, Bradley F.
   Iglesias-Rodriguez, Debora
TI Intraspecific Differences in Biogeochemical Responses to Thermal Change
   in the Coccolithophore Emiliania huxleyi
SO PLOS ONE
DT Article
ID SOLID-STATE NMR; AMORPHOUS CALCIUM-CARBONATE; INTRACELLULAR
   CALCIFICATION; GENETIC DIFFERENTIATION; MARINE-PHYTOPLANKTON; OCEAN
   ACIDIFICATION; LOHMANN KAMPTNER; ELEVATED PCO(2); NORTH-ATLANTIC; CA-43
   NMR
AB The species concept in marine phytoplankton is defined based on genomic, morphological, and functional properties. Reports of intraspecific diversity are widespread across major phytoplankton groups but the impacts of this variation on ecological and biogeochemical processes are often overlooked. Intraspecific diversity is well known within coccolitho-phores, which play an important role in the marine carbon cycle via production of particulate inorganic carbon. In this study, we investigated strain-specific responses to temperature in terms of morphology, carbon production, and carbonate mineralogy using a combination of microscopy, elemental analysis, flow cytometry, and nuclear magnetic resonance. Two strains of the cosmopolitan coccolithophore E. huxleyi isolated from different regions (subtropical, CCMP371; temperate, CCMP3266) were cultured under a range of temperature conditions (10 degrees C, 15 degrees C, and 20 degrees C) using batch cultures and sampled during both exponential and stationary growth. Results for both strains showed that growth rates decreased at lower temperatures while coccosphere size increased. Between 15 degrees C and 20 degrees C, both strains produced similar amounts of total carbon, but differed in allocation of that carbon between particulate inorganic carbon (PIC) and particulate organic carbon (POC), though temperature effects were not detected. Between 10 degrees C and 20 degrees C, temperature effects on daily production of PIC and POC, as well as the cellular quota of POC were detected in CCMP3266. Strain-specific differences in coccolith shedding rates were found during exponential growth. In addition, daily shedding rates were negatively related to temperature in CCMP371 but not in CCMP3266. Despite differences in rates of particulate inorganic carbon production, both strains were found to produce coccoliths composed entirely of pure calcite, as established by solid-state C-13 and Ca-43 NMR and X-ray diffraction measurements. These results highlight the limitations of the species concept and the need for a trait-based system to better quantify diversity within marine phytoplankton communities.
TC 5
Z9 5
SN 1932-6203
PD SEP 1
PY 2016
VL 11
IS 9
AR e0162313
DI 10.1371/journal.pone.0162313
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000382855600129
PM 27584038
ER

PT J
AU Dimitriadis, C
   Koutsoubas, D
   Arvanitidis, C
AF Dimitriadis, Charalampos
   Koutsoubas, Drosos
   Arvanitidis, Christos
TI On the use of predator traits and distribution in environmental impact
   assessment: the trophic/dispersal sufficiency concept
SO MARINE BIODIVERSITY
DT Article
DE Biogeography; Macrofauna; Disturbance assessment; Aquaculture; Predators
ID SEVERELY FLUCTUATING ENVIRONMENT; MARINE BENTHIC COMMUNITIES; MESSINIAN
   SALINITY CRISIS; LAGOON GIALOVA LAGOON; MACROBENTHIC COMMUNITIES;
   FEEDING GUILDS; FAUNA; BIOGEOGRAPHY; DIVERSITY; STABILITY
AB Environmental change can alter both species distribution range patterns at a regional scale and their feeding habits at a local scale. While several studies have highlighted the mechanisms driving such changes separately, little is known on their combined effect on the local communities. In this manuscript, we used both feeding and distributional traits of macro-benthic species and examined their combined response across an environmental gradient induced by an aquaculture unit. Our results mainly suggest that specialized predators with narrow geographic distributions and niches were more sensitive to environmental change than the less specialized groups. Moreover, under harsh environmental conditions, predatory species with a wide dispersion capacity can sustain viable populations through niche generalization. In contrast, in areas of low environmental disturbance, predatory species with a more restricted dispersal capability (i.e. some endemic species) can coexist via niche differentiation. In this context, our findings contribute towards a better understanding of benthic communities' functional response to environmental change and may be of use in environmental impact assessment.
RI Arvanitidis, Christos/J-1540-2016
OI Arvanitidis, Christos/0000-0002-6924-5255
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1867-1616
EI 1867-1624
PD SEP
PY 2016
VL 46
IS 3
BP 603
EP 613
DI 10.1007/s12526-015-0407-8
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000382003800013
ER

PT J
AU Zuluaga-Gomez, MA
   Fitzgerald, DB
   Giarrizzo, T
   Winemiller, KO
AF Zuluaga-Gomez, Mario Alejandro
   Fitzgerald, Daniel B.
   Giarrizzo, Tommaso
   Winemiller, Kirk O.
TI Morphologic and trophic diversity of fish assemblages in rapids of the
   Xingu River, a major Amazon tributary and region of endemism
SO ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY OF FISHES
DT Article
DE Rheophilic; Neotropics; Anostomidae; Cichlidae; Loricariidae;
   Serrasalmidae; Stable isotope; Functional traits
ID CATFISHES SILURIFORMES LORICARIIDAE; STABLE-ISOTOPE RATIOS; FOOD WEBS;
   FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; COMMUNITY ECOLOGY; SPECIES TRAITS; CONVERGENCE;
   GRADIENTS; MODELS; BRAZIL
AB Increasing hydropower expansion in hyper-diverse tropical river basins is currently threatening aquatic biodiversity on an unprecedented scale. Among the largest and most controversial of these projects is the Belo Monte Hydroelectric Complex being constructed on the Xingu River, a major Amazon tributary in Brazil. Despite the potentially large impacts, almost no baseline ecological data are available for the river's diverse ichthyofauna. This study uses ecomorphology and stable isotope analysis to explore the functional and trophic relationships among four of the dominant families within the Xingu River rapids (Loricariidae, Cichlidae, Anostomidae, and Serrasalmidae). Morphological analysis revealed clear separation of these families based on functional traits associated with microhabitat use and foraging strategies, with the Loricariidae and Cichlidae displaying greatest functional diversity. The four families analyzed were not clearly differentiated in isotopic space defined by delta C-13 and delta N-15 values. Considerable overlap was observed among isotopic niches and all four families primarily assimilated material originating from phytomicrobenthos (assumed to be mainly benthic algae). Differences between morphological and trophic diversity within families provide insight into how this diverse assemblage may be partitioning niche space, which in turn has implications for population responses to hydrologic alteration.
OI Zuluaga Gomez, Mario Alejandro/0000-0002-6296-2833
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 0378-1909
EI 1573-5133
PD SEP
PY 2016
VL 99
IS 8-9
BP 647
EP 658
DI 10.1007/s10641-016-0506-9
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000382693900006
ER

PT J
AU Bargmann, T
   Heegaard, E
   Hatteland, BA
   Chipperfield, JD
   Grytnes, JA
AF Bargmann, Tessa
   Heegaard, Einar
   Hatteland, Bjorn Arild
   Chipperfield, Joseph Daniel
   Grytnes, John-Arvid
TI Species trait selection along a prescribed fire chronosequence
SO INSECT CONSERVATION AND DIVERSITY
DT Article
DE Carabidae; coastal heathland; community assembly via trait selection;
   conservation management; ground beetle; indicator value; prescribed
   burning; Succession
ID GROUND-BEETLES COLEOPTERA; CARABID BEETLES; FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY;
   BAYESIAN-INFERENCE; HEATHLAND PLANTS; GREAT-BRITAIN; HABITAT;
   DISTURBANCE; ARTHROPODS; SUCCESSION
AB 1. Fire is a widespread management practice used in the maintenance of European heathland. Frequent prescribed burns in small patches have been shown to benefit carabid communities; however, how fire favours specific life-history traits is poorly understood.
   2. In this study, we identify characteristic species of the successional stages within heathlands, and find the traits which are characteristic of species in burnt areas versus areas dominated by older heath stands.
   3. We identify 10 species as indicator species for heathland in the pioneer stage (0-5 years old); Amara lunicollis, Bembidion lampros, Calathus fuscipes, Carabus problematicus, Cicindela campestris, Nebria salina, Notiophilus aquaticus, Poecilus cupreus, P. lepidus and P. versicolor. Dyschirius globosus is identified as an indicator for the building stage (6-14 years old), and Carabus violaceus as an indicator for the mature stage (15-25 years old).
   4. Moisture preference and diet are identified as traits that determine species response to prescribed fire. Collembolan specialists and species with no moisture preference are shown to be most abundant in burnt patches, whereas generalist predators and species with a high moisture preference are less tolerant of fire.
   5. Knowledge of species sorting along a prescribed fire gradient can provide valuable information for heathland conservation.
OI Grytnes, John-Arvid/0000-0002-6365-9676
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 1752-458X
EI 1752-4598
PD SEP
PY 2016
VL 9
IS 5
BP 446
EP 455
DI 10.1111/icad.12182
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Entomology
UT WOS:000382494700008
ER

PT J
AU Lurig, MD
   Best, RJ
   Stachowicz, JJ
AF Lurig, Moritz D.
   Best, Rebecca J.
   Stachowicz, John J.
TI Microhabitat partitioning in seagrass mesograzers is driven by
   consistent species choices across multiple predator and competitor
   contexts
SO OIKOS
DT Article
ID LIMITING SIMILARITY; RELATIVE IMPORTANCE; HABITAT SELECTION; TIGER
   BEETLES; AMPHIPOD; ECOSYSTEMS; FOOD; BIODIVERSITY; COMMUNITIES;
   ABUNDANCE
AB Explanations for the coexistence of multiple species from the same functional group or taxonomic clade frequently include fine-scale resource partitioning. However, despite the hypothesized importance of niche partitioning, we know relatively little about the underlying mechanisms. For example, differences in resource use may be fixed consequences of organism traits, or they may be achieved via context-dependent behaviors. In this study we investigated mechanisms of microhabitat partitioning using eight species of marine mesograzers inhabiting seagrass and algae habitats, using laboratory trials to measure microhabitat use in the presence and absence of both predators and competitors. We found clear evidence for microhabitat partitioning between the species, which account for over 60% of the mesograzers commonly found in this system and vary in both body size and the ability to build tubes on habitat substrates. Species-specific microhabitat use was poorly predicted by these two traits, but remained remarkably consistent across contexts. Habitat use was not affected by the presence of fish predators common in this system, even though predation pressure is thought to place strong constraints on microhabitat in communities of plant-associated arthropods. The presence of competing species also did not affect the relative separation of microhabitat use. Behavioral responses to potential competitors did cause significant changes in microhabitat use in all of the smallest species, but these changes did not depend on competitor identity and were relatively small compared to among-species patterns of microhabitat partitioning. The consistency of species-specific microhabitat use, regardless of the presence of predators or competitors, should make coexistence most likely among species that differ in these choices. For these species, it appears that the benefits accrued from their selected microhabitats are not affected by species interactions, or that any benefits of alternative microhabitat use are outweighed by risks associated with movement.
RI Best, Rebecca/D-2934-2013
OI Best, Rebecca/0000-0003-2103-064X; Lurig, Moritz/0000-0002-8175-6234
TC 8
Z9 8
SN 0030-1299
EI 1600-0706
PD SEP
PY 2016
VL 125
IS 9
BP 1324
EP 1333
DI 10.1111/oik.02932
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000382496000012
ER

PT J
AU Chikina, M
   Robinson, JD
   Clark, NL
AF Chikina, Maria
   Robinson, Joseph D.
   Clark, Nathan L.
TI Hundreds of Genes Experienced Convergent Shifts in Selective Pressure in
   Marine Mammals
SO MOLECULAR BIOLOGY AND EVOLUTION
DT Article
DE convergent evolution; convergence; marine mammals; adaptive evolution;
   relaxation of constraint; functional tional constraint.
ID ADAPTIVE EVOLUTION; ECHOLOCATING MAMMALS; MOLECULAR EVOLUTION; PARALLEL
   EVOLUTION; MAXIMUM-LIKELIHOOD; SEQUENCE EVOLUTION; POSITIVE SELECTION;
   PROTEIN EVOLUTION; ADAPTATION; GENOMES
AB Mammal species have made the transition to the marine environment several times, and their lineages represent one of the classical examples of convergent evolution in morphological and physiological traits. Nevertheless, the genetic mechanisms of their phenotypic transition are poorly understood, and investigations into convergence at the molecular level have been inconclusive. While past studies have searched for convergent changes at specific amino acid sites, we propose an alternative strategy to identify those genes that experienced convergent changes in their selective pressures, visible as changes in evolutionary rate specifically in the marine lineages. We present evidence of widespread convergence at the gene level by identifying parallel shifts in evolutionary rate during three independent episodes of mammalian adaptation to the marine environment. Hundreds of genes accelerated their evolutionary rates in all three marine mammal lineages during their transition to aquatic life. These marine-accelerated genes are highly enriched for pathways that control recognized functional adaptations in marine mammals, including muscle physiology, lipid-metabolism, sensory systems, and skin and connective tissue. The accelerations resulted from both adaptive evolution as seen in skin and lung genes, and loss of function as in gustatory and olfactory genes. In regard to sensory systems, this finding provides further evidence that reduced senses of taste and smell are ubiquitous in marine mammals. Our analysis demonstrates the feasibility of identifying genes underlying convergent organism-level characteristics on a genomewide scale and without prior knowledge of adaptations, and provides a powerful approach for investigating the physiological functions of mammalian genes.
RI Clark, Nathan/P-4855-2014
OI Clark, Nathan/0000-0003-0006-8374
TC 15
Z9 15
SN 0737-4038
EI 1537-1719
PD SEP
PY 2016
VL 33
IS 9
BP 2182
EP 2192
DI 10.1093/molbev/msw112
SC Biochemistry & Molecular Biology; Evolutionary Biology; Genetics &
   Heredity
UT WOS:000381702500002
PM 27329977
ER

PT J
AU Lenton, TM
   Dahl, TW
   Daines, SJ
   Mills, BJW
   Ozaki, K
   Saltzman, MR
   Porada, P
AF Lenton, Timothy M.
   Dahl, Tais W.
   Daines, Stuart J.
   Mills, Benjamin J. W.
   Ozaki, Kazumi
   Saltzman, Matthew R.
   Porada, Philipp
TI Earliest land plants created modern levels of atmospheric oxygen
SO PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES OF THE UNITED STATES OF
   AMERICA
DT Article
DE oxygen; Paleozoic; phosphorus; plants; weathering
ID PHANEROZOIC TIME; MELVILLE ISLAND; ORGANIC-MATTER; DEVONIAN COALS;
   DEPOSITIONAL ENVIRONMENT; OCEAN OXYGENATION; ARCTIC CANADA; CARBON;
   CHARCOAL; ORDOVICIAN
AB The progressive oxygenation of the Earth's atmosphere was pivotal to the evolution of life, but the puzzle of when and how atmospheric oxygen (O-2) first approached modern levels (similar to 21%) remains unresolved. Redox proxy data indicate the deep oceans were oxygenated during 435-392 Ma, and the appearance of fossil charcoal indicates O-2 > 15-17% by 420-400 Ma. However, existing models have failed to predict oxygenation at this time. Here we show that the earliest plants, which colonized the land surface from similar to 470 Ma onward, were responsible for this mid-Paleozoic oxygenation event, through greatly increasing global organic carbon burialthe net long-term source of O-2. We use a trait-based ecophysiological model to predict that cryptogamic vegetation cover could have achieved similar to 30% of today's global terrestrial net primary productivity by similar to 445 Ma. Data from modern bryophytes suggests this plentiful early plant material had a much higher molar C:P ratio (similar to 2,000) than marine biomass (similar to 100), such that a given weathering flux of phosphorus could support more organic carbon burial. Furthermore, recent experiments suggest that early plants selectively increased the flux of phosphorus (relative to alkalinity) weathered from rocks. Combining these effects in a model of long-term biogeochemical cycling, we reproduce a sustained +2% increase in the carbonate carbon isotope (delta C-13) record by similar to 445 Ma, and predict a corresponding rise in O-2 to present levels by 420-400 Ma, consistent with geochemical data. This oxygen rise represents a permanent shift in regulatory regime to one where fire-mediated negative feedbacks stabilize high O-2 levels.
RI Saltzman, Matthew/B-6769-2011; Lenton, Tim/X-1893-2018
OI Saltzman, Matthew/0000-0001-8052-1399; Lenton, Tim/0000-0002-6725-7498;
   Dahl, Tais/0000-0003-4629-8036; Mills, Benjamin/0000-0002-9141-0931
TC 45
Z9 47
SN 0027-8424
PD AUG 30
PY 2016
VL 113
IS 35
BP 9704
EP 9709
DI 10.1073/pnas.1604787113
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000383090700034
PM 27528678
ER

PT J
AU Dee, LE
   Miller, SJ
   Peavey, LE
   Bradley, D
   Gentry, RR
   Startz, R
   Gaines, SD
   Lester, SE
AF Dee, Laura E.
   Miller, Steve J.
   Peavey, Lindsey E.
   Bradley, Darcy
   Gentry, Rebecca R.
   Startz, Richard
   Gaines, Steven D.
   Lester, Sarah E.
TI Functional diversity of catch mitigates negative effects of temperature
   variability on fisheries yields
SO PROCEEDINGS OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY B-BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES
DT Article
DE ecosystem services; functional diversity; temperature variability;
   fisheries; biodiversity
ID CLIMATE-CHANGE IMPACTS; POPULATION-DYNAMICS; WORLD FISHERIES;
   BIODIVERSITY; STABILITY; FRAMEWORK; OCEAN; PERFORMANCE; PRODUCTIVITY;
   HYPOTHESIS
AB Temperature variation within a year can impact biological processes driving population abundances. The implications for the ecosystem services these populations provide, including food production from marine fisheries, are poorly understood. Whether and how temperature variability impacts fishery yields may depend on the number of harvested species and differences in their responses to varying temperatures. Drawing from previous theoretical and empirical studies, we predict that greater temperature variability within years will reduce yields, but harvesting a larger number of species, especially a more functionally diverse set, will decrease this impact. Using a global marine fisheries dataset, we find that within-year temperature variability reduces yields, but current levels of functional diversity (FD) of targeted species, measured using traits related to species' responses to temperature, largely offset this effect. Globally, high FD of catch could avoid annual losses in yield of 6.8% relative to projections if FD were degraded to the lowest level observed in the data. By contrast, species richness in the catch and in the ecosystem did not provide a similar mitigating effect. This work provides novel empirical evidence that short-term temperature variability can negatively impact the provisioning of ecosystem services, but that FD can buffer these negative impacts.
OI Peavey Reeves, Lindsey/0000-0003-4900-5921; Dee,
   Laura/0000-0003-0471-1371
TC 5
Z9 5
SN 0962-8452
EI 1471-2954
PD AUG 17
PY 2016
VL 283
IS 1836
AR 20161435
DI 10.1098/rspb.2016.1435
SC Life Sciences & Biomedicine - Other Topics; Environmental Sciences &
   Ecology; Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000384274700003
PM 27534960
ER

PT J
AU Hird, CM
   Urbina, MA
   Lewis, CN
   Snape, JR
   Galloway, TS
AF Hird, Cameron M.
   Urbina, Mauricio A.
   Lewis, Ceri N.
   Snape, Jason R.
   Galloway, Tamara S.
TI Fluoxetine Exhibits Pharmacological Effects and Trait-Based Sensitivity
   in a Marine Worm
SO ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY
DT Article
ID POLYCHAETE NEREIS-DIVERSICOLOR; CAENORHABDITIS-ELEGANS; METABOLIC-RATE;
   WHITE SHRIMP; N EXCRETION; SEROTONIN; PHARMACEUTICALS; WATER; SEDIMENT;
   FISH
AB Global production of pharmacologically active compounds exceeds 100 000 tons annually, a proportion of which enters aquatic environments through patient use, improper medicine disposal, and production. These compounds are designed to have mode-of-action (MoA) effects, on specific biological pathways, with potential to impact nontarget species. Here, we used MoA and trait-based approaches to quantify uptake and biological effects of fluoxetine, a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor, in filter and deposit feeding marine worms (Hediste diversicolor). Worms exposed to 10 mu g L-1, accumulated fluoxetine with a body burden over 270 times greater than exposure concentrations, resulting in similar to 10% increased coelomic fluid serotonin, a pharmacological effect. Observed effects included weight loss (up to 2% at 500 mu g L-1), decreased feeding rate (68% at 500 pig L-1), and altered metabolism (oxygen consumption, ammonia excretion, and O/N from 10 mu g L-1). Bioconcentration of fluoxetine was dependent on route of uptake, with filter feeding worms experiencing up to 130 times greater body burden ratios and increased magnitudes of effects than deposit feeders, a trait-based sensitivity likely as a consequence of fluoxetine partitioning to sediment. This study highlights how novel approaches such as MoA and trait-based methods can supplement environmental risk assessments of pharmaceuticals.
OI Hird, Cameron/0000-0002-4631-9418; A, Mauricio/0000-0001-8040-6147
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 0013-936X
EI 1520-5851
PD AUG 2
PY 2016
VL 50
IS 15
BP 8344
EP 8352
DI 10.1021/acs.est.6b03233
SC Engineering; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000381063200047
PM 27379928
ER

PT J
AU Xu, GJ
   Xu, HL
AF Xu, Guangjian
   Xu, Henglong
TI An approach to analyzing environmental drivers to shape spatial
   variations in body-size structure of biofilm-dwelling protozoa during an
   annual cycle in marine ecosystems
SO ECOLOGICAL INDICATORS
DT Article
DE Environmental driver; Body-size structure; Biofilm-dwelling protozoa;
   Water quality; Bioassessment; Marine ecosystems
ID WATER-QUALITY; CILIATE COMMUNITIES; SPECIES POOL; COASTAL WATERS;
   NORTHERN CHINA; JIAOZHOU BAY; YELLOW SEA; BIOASSESSMENT; BIODIVERSITY;
   ENRICHMENT
AB As an inherent trait, body-size structure has been used to summarize functional features of a community instead of taxonomic resolutions due to the high redundancy for bioassessment. In this study, the multivariate approaches were used to determine the environmental drivers to the spatial variation in body-size structure based on an annual dataset of biofilm-dwelling protozoa. Samples were monthly collected at four stations within a gradient of pollution in coastal waters of the Yellow Sea, northern China during a 1-year cycle. The second-stage (2STAGE) clustering and ordination analyses demonstrated that the annual patterns were significantly different among four sampling stations. Mantel analysis showed the spatial variations in body-size structures of the protozoa were significantly correlated with the water quality status along the pollution gradient. Best matching analysis revealed that the potential environmental drivers to shape the spatial difference in body-size structure may be pH, chemical oxygen demand (COD) and nutrients (e.g., soluble phosphates, ammonia and nitrates). It is suggested that the multivariate approaches used may determine the environmental drivers to shape the spatial variations in body-size structure of biofilm-dwelling protozoa in marine ecosystems. (C) 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1470-160X
EI 1872-7034
PD AUG
PY 2016
VL 67
BP 292
EP 296
DI 10.1016/j.ecolind.2016.03.007
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000388785300029
ER

PT J
AU Leinaas, HP
   Jalal, M
   Gabrielsen, TM
   Hessen, DO
AF Leinaas, Hans Petter
   Jalal, Marwa
   Gabrielsen, Tove M.
   Hessen, Dag O.
TI Inter- and intraspecific variation in body- and genome size in calanoid
   copepods from temperate and arctic waters
SO ECOLOGY AND EVOLUTION
DT Article
DE Bergmann clines; Calanus; climate zones; flow cytometry; Paraeuchaeta
ID LIFE-HISTORY TRAITS; VERTICAL-DISTRIBUTION; GROWTH-RATE; FINMARCHICUS;
   ECTOTHERMS; GLACIALIS; DNA; CRUSTACEANS; SEA; HYPERBOREUS
AB The tendency of ectotherms to get larger in the cold (Bergmann clines) has potentially great implications for individual performance and food web dynamics. The mechanistic drivers of this trend are not well understood, however. One fundamental question is to which extent variation in body size is attributed to variation in cell size, which again is related to genome size. In this study, we analyzed body and genome size in four species of marine calanoid copepods, Calanus finmarchicus, C. glacialis, C. hyperboreus and Paraeuchaeta norvegica, with populations from both south Norwegian fjords and the High Arctic. The Calanus species showed typical interspecific Bergmann clines, and we assessed whether they also displayed similar intraspecific variations-and if correlation between genome size and body size differed between species. There were considerable inter- as well as intraspecific variations in body size and genome size, with the northernmost populations having the largest values of both variables within each species. Positive intraspecific relationships suggest a functional link between body and genome size, although its adaptiveness has not been settled. Impact of additional drivers like phylogeny or specific adaptations, however, was suggested by striking divergences in body size - genome size ratios among species. Thus, C. glacialis and C. hyperboreus, had fairly similar genome size despite very different body size, while P. norvegica, of similar body size as C. hyperboreus, had the largest genome sizes ever recorded from copepods. The inter- and intraspecific latitudinal body size clines suggest that climate change may have major impact on body size composition of keystone species in marine planktonic food webs.
TC 5
Z9 5
SN 2045-7758
PD AUG
PY 2016
VL 6
IS 16
BP 5585
EP 5595
DI 10.1002/ece3.2302
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000381578400003
PM 27547339
ER

PT J
AU Storero, LP
   Botto, F
   Narvarte, MA
   Iribarne, OO
AF Storero, L. P.
   Botto, F.
   Narvarte, M. A.
   Iribarne, O. O.
TI Influence of maturity condition and habitat type on food resources
   utilization by Octopus tehuelchus in Atlantic Patagonian coastal
   ecosystems
SO MARINE BIOLOGY
DT Article
ID STABLE-ISOTOPE RATIOS; TROPHIC POSITION; LIFE-HISTORY; SQUID; NITROGEN;
   CARBON; DELTA-C-13; MODELS; IMPACT; INVERTEBRATES
AB This study evaluates differences in Octopus tehuelchus diet in relation to sex and maturity condition (juvenile, mature, post-spawning) in two contrasting habitat types (sandy vs. rocky). Muscle of O. tehuelchus and of its associated food sources were analyzed for delta C-13 and delta N-15. There was no correlation between delta C-13 or delta N-15 and octopus size. delta C-13 and delta N-15 values were similar between sexes indicating similar diets. The Bayesian mixing model (MixSIAR) showed that the proportional contribution of the sources varied with the maturity condition of octopuses, and between habitat types. Our results show differences in the proportions of alternative prey in the diet of O. tehuelchus related to their physiological condition and the habitat characteristics. The differential food source utilization may be related to differential prey energy contribution and could explain the differences in the growth pattern and life span, as well as in the reproductive traits and recruitment success of O. tehuelchus in sandy and rocky habitats. Our results highlight the importance of considering such differences in octopus diet, since they may have consequences for population dynamics, but also in the species' trophic niche and its functional role in communities.
OI Storero, Lorena Pia/0000-0001-5304-6203
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0025-3162
EI 1432-1793
PD AUG
PY 2016
VL 163
IS 8
AR 179
DI 10.1007/s00227-016-2952-5
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000382107300013
ER

PT J
AU Malavasi, M
   Conti, L
   Carboni, M
   Cutini, M
   Acosta, ATR
AF Malavasi, Marco
   Conti, Luisa
   Carboni, Marta
   Cutini, Maurizio
   Acosta, Alicia T. R.
TI Multifaceted Analysis of Patch-Level Plant Diversity in Response to
   Landscape Spatial Pattern and History on Mediterranean Dunes
SO ECOSYSTEMS
DT Article
DE mixed-effect models; landscape change; Mediterranean coastal dunes;
   plant diversity; partitioning of diversity; diversity facets
ID FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; COASTAL DUNES; BETA-DIVERSITY; HABITAT
   FRAGMENTATION; SPECIES-DIVERSITY; COMMUNITIES; BIODIVERSITY; VEGETATION;
   RICHNESS; FOREST
AB Landscape structure is known to critically affect biodiversity. However, although the multi-facetted character of biodiversity is widely recognized, few studies have linked landscape spatial pattern and history simultaneously to multiple facets (taxonomic, functional, and phylogenetic) and spatial components (alpha, beta, and gamma) of plant diversity. We set out to reveal whether landscape parameters have specific effects on the separate diversity facets and components of plant diversity at a patch scale on coastal dune landscapes of Central Italy. For each landscape patch, we computed a set of patch-based metrics relying on multi-temporal land-cover maps. Based on a database of plant community plots, on functional traits from field measurements and on a dated phylogenetic tree, we calculated taxonomic (TD), functional (FD), and phylogenetic diversity (PD) within each patch at alpha, beta, and gamma level. Diversity measures were then related to the landscape metrics via linear mixed-effect models. Landscape pattern and transformations affected TD only moderately in coastal dune ecosystems. We found much stronger and contrasted effects on FD and PD. FD increased in patches surrounded by human-dominated habitats; PD was higher in fragmented patches, particularly in the Mediterranean macchia. Moreover, landscape pattern affected differently the single communities, the turnover among communities and the pool of species within the patch (alpha, beta, and gamma components). Our results call for the combined inclusion of FD and PD and their partitions into ecological analyses, being TD too crude to capture the comprehensive and contrasted response of plant diversity to landscape spatial pattern.
RI Carboni, Marta/A-2658-2012
OI Carboni, Marta/0000-0002-9348-4758; Malavasi, Marco/0000-0002-9639-1784;
   Acosta, Alicia T. R./0000-0001-6572-3187
TC 5
Z9 6
SN 1432-9840
EI 1435-0629
PD AUG
PY 2016
VL 19
IS 5
BP 850
EP 864
DI 10.1007/s10021-016-9971-4
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000380669300006
ER

PT J
AU Eiler, A
   Mondav, R
   Sinclair, L
   Fernandez-Vidal, L
   Scofield, DG
   Schwientek, P
   Martinez-Garcia, M
   Torrents, D
   McMahon, KD
   Andersson, SGE
   Stepanauskas, R
   Woyke, T
   Bertilsson, S
AF Eiler, Alexander
   Mondav, Rhiannon
   Sinclair, Lucas
   Fernandez-Vidal, Leyden
   Scofield, Douglas G.
   Schwientek, Patrick
   Martinez-Garcia, Manuel
   Torrents, David
   McMahon, Katherine D.
   Andersson, Siv G. E.
   Stepanauskas, Ramunas
   Woyke, Tanja
   Bertilsson, Stefan
TI Tuning fresh: radiation through rewiring of central metabolism in
   streamlined bacteria
SO ISME JOURNAL
DT Article
ID WATER BACTERIOPLANKTON; HIGH-THROUGHPUT; SAR11 BACTERIA; SARGASSO SEA;
   SALT STRESS; DYNAMICS; OCEAN; EVOLUTION; ATLANTIC; GROWTH
AB Most free-living planktonic cells are streamlined and in spite of their limitations in functional flexibility, their vast populations have radiated into a wide range of aquatic habitats. Here we compared the metabolic potential of subgroups in the Alphaproteobacteria lineage SAR11 adapted to marine and freshwater habitats. Our results suggest that the successful leap from marine to freshwaters in SAR11 was accompanied by a loss of several carbon degradation pathways and a rewiring of the central metabolism. Examples for these are C1 and methylated compounds degradation pathways, the Entner-Doudouroff pathway, the glyoxylate shunt and anapleuretic carbon fixation being absent from the freshwater genomes. Evolutionary reconstructions further suggest that the metabolic modules making up these important freshwater metabolic traits were already present in the gene pool of ancestral marine SAR11 populations. The loss of the glyoxylate shunt had already occurred in the common ancestor of the freshwater subgroup and its closest marine relatives, suggesting that the adaptation to freshwater was a gradual process. Furthermore, our results indicate rapid evolution of TRAP transporters in the freshwater clade involved in the uptake of low molecular weight carboxylic acids. We propose that such gradual tuning of metabolic pathways and transporters toward locally available organic substrates is linked to the formation of subgroups within the SAR11 clade and that this process was critical for the freshwater clade to find and fix an adaptive phenotype.
RI Mondav, Rhiannon/M-1219-2017; Eiler, Alexander/V-9220-2017
OI Mondav, Rhiannon/0000-0002-5574-5531; Eiler,
   Alexander/0000-0001-9916-9567; Torrents, David/0000-0002-6086-9037;
   Martinez-Garcia, Manuel/0000-0001-5056-1525; McMahon, Katherine
   D./0000-0002-7038-026X; Scofield, Douglas/0000-0001-5235-6461; Sinclair,
   Lucas/0000-0003-4134-3571; Stepanauskas, Ramunas/0000-0003-4458-3108
TC 11
Z9 11
SN 1751-7362
EI 1751-7370
PD AUG
PY 2016
VL 10
IS 8
BP 1902
EP 1914
DI 10.1038/ismej.2015.260
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Microbiology
UT WOS:000380959800010
PM 26784354
ER

PT J
AU McKown, AD
   Akamine, ME
   Sack, L
AF McKown, Athena D.
   Akamine, Michelle Elmore
   Sack, Lawren
TI Trait convergence and diversification arising from a complex
   evolutionary history in Hawaiian species of Scaevola
SO OECOLOGIA
DT Article
DE Adaptive radiation; Divergence; Homoploid hybridization; Island
   evolution; Functional traits
ID SUBTROPICAL RAIN-FOREST; PLANT FUNCTIONAL TRAITS; ADAPTIVE RADIATION;
   METROSIDEROS-POLYMORPHA; PHOTOSYNTHETIC PHYSIOLOGY; VIOLETS VIOLA;
   GROWTH FORM; COMMUNITY; LOBELIADS; GOODENIACEAE
AB Species variation in functional traits may reflect diversification relating to convergence and/or divergence depending on environmental pressures and phylogenetic history. We tested trait-environment relationships and their basis in finer-scale evolutionary processes among nine extant Hawaiian species of Scaevola L. (Goodeniaceae), a taxon with a complex history of three independent colonizations by different phylogenetic lineages, parallel ecological specialization, and homoploid hybridization events in Hawai'i. Using a wild population for each species, we evaluated traits related to plant function (morphology, leaf and wood anatomy, nutrient and carbon isotope composition). Hawaiian Scaevola species were distributed across coastal, dry forest and wet forest environments; multivariate environmental analysis using abiotic and biotic factors further showed that species from distantly related lineages inhabited similar environments. Many traits correlated with environment (based on the multivariate environmental analysis), considering both distantly related species and more closely related species. Scaevola species within shared habitats generally showed trait convergence across distantly related lineages, particularly among wet forest species. Furthermore, trait diversification through divergence was extensive among closely related Scaevola species that radiated into novel environments, especially in plant morphology and traits affecting water relations. Homoploid hybrid-origin species were "intermediate" compared to their ancestral parent species, and possessed trait combinations relevant for their current habitat. The diversity in functional traits reflected strong influences of both ecology and evolutionary history in native Hawaiian Scaevola species, and trait correspondence with environment was due to the combination of multiple processes within the taxon: trait pre-adaptation and filtering, evolutionary convergence, divergence, and hybridization.
RI Sack, Lawren/A-5492-2008
OI Sack, Lawren/0000-0002-7009-7202; McKown, Athena/0000-0002-7402-9952
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 0029-8549
EI 1432-1939
PD AUG
PY 2016
VL 181
IS 4
BP 1083
EP 1100
DI 10.1007/s00442-016-3640-3
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000380282100012
PM 27142283
ER

PT J
AU Hewitt, JE
   Ellis, JI
   Thrush, SF
AF Hewitt, Judi E.
   Ellis, Joanne I.
   Thrush, Simon F.
TI Multiple stressors, nonlinear effects and the implications of climate
   change impacts on marine coastal ecosystems
SO GLOBAL CHANGE BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE benthic macrofauna; freshwater discharge; interactions; key species;
   rainfall; regression trees; southern oscillation; species composition;
   temperature; wave exposure
ID SPECIES DISTRIBUTIONS; COMMUNITY STRUCTURE; BIOTIC INTEGRITY; SPATIAL
   SCALES; TEMPERATURE; REGRESSION; ORGANISMS; ESTUARINE; GRADIENTS;
   SYSTEMS
AB Global climate change will undoubtedly be a pressure on coastal marine ecosystems, affecting not only species distributions and physiology but also ecosystem functioning. In the coastal zone, the environmental variables that may drive ecological responses to climate change include temperature, wave energy, upwelling events and freshwater inputs, and all act and interact at a variety of spatial and temporal scales. To date, we have a poor understanding of how climate-related environmental changes may affect coastal marine ecosystems or which environmental variables are likely to produce priority effects. Here we use time series data (17years) of coastal benthic macrofauna to investigate responses to a range of climate-influenced variables including sea-surface temperature, southern oscillation indices (SOI, Z4), wind-wave exposure, freshwater inputs and rainfall. We investigate responses from the abundances of individual species to abundances of functional traits and test whether species that are near the edge of their tolerance to another stressor (in this case sedimentation) may exhibit stronger responses. The responses we observed were all nonlinear and some exhibited thresholds. While temperature was most frequently an important predictor, wave exposure and ENSO-related variables were also frequently important and most ecological variables responded to interactions between environmental variables. There were also indications that species sensitive to another stressor responded more strongly to weaker climate-related environmental change at the stressed site than the unstressed site. The observed interactions between climate variables, effects on key species or functional traits, and synergistic effects of additional anthropogenic stressors have important implications for understanding and predicting the ecological consequences of climate change to coastal ecosystems.
OI Thrush, Simon/0000-0002-4005-3882
TC 16
Z9 16
SN 1354-1013
EI 1365-2486
PD AUG
PY 2016
VL 22
IS 8
BP 2665
EP 2675
DI 10.1111/gcb.13176
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000380016800003
PM 26648483
ER

PT J
AU Vander Vorste, R
   Malard, F
   Datry, T
AF Vander Vorste, Ross
   Malard, Florian
   Datry, Thibault
TI Is drift the primary process promoting the resilience of river
   invertebrate communities? A manipulative field experiment in an
   intermittent alluvial river
SO FRESHWATER BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE aerial oviposition; braided river; hyporheic zone; resistance forms;
   stream drying
ID HYPORHEIC REFUGE HYPOTHESIS; MACROINVERTEBRATE COMMUNITY; COLONIZATION
   PATTERNS; AQUATIC INVERTEBRATES; SUPRASEASONAL DROUGHT; SPATIAL
   VARIABILITY; FLOW INTERMITTENCE; TEMPORARY RIVERS; EXTINCTION RISK;
   STREAM BENTHOS
AB In river systems, aquatic invertebrate communities are surprisingly persistent over time and generally recover quickly from disturbances. Drift has long been viewed as the primary process promoting this resilience, and it plays a important role in predictive models of community composition and concepts in lotic ecology. More recently, other processes such as vertical migration from the hyporheic zone, aerial oviposition from distant refuges and the use of resistance forms (e.g. diapause) have received greater recognition and support for their importance. In this study, the view that drift is the primary process promoting invertebrate community resilience was challenged in an intermittent alluvial river using reach-scale flow manipulations. First, six treatment channels were completely dried for 1week, while three others were left flowing to be used as controls. Second, flow was re-established in channels and drift was either allowed or blocked for a 4-week period. Third, during this period the resilience of community structure, composition and function was compared between treatments, and the potential for colonisation from the drift, hyporheic zone, aerial oviposition and resistance forms was measured. Communities recovered after only 2weeks in all of the previously dried channels, and contrary to our hypotheses, invertebrate community structure, composition and functional trait composition were not altered by blocking drift, indicating it was not the primary process promoting resilience in this river. Three lines of evidence suggested colonisation from the hyporheic zone and not aerial oviposition nor resistance forms promoted resilience following rewetting including the following: (i) finding all common benthic taxa in the hyporheic zone during the drying event, (ii) a distinct decrease in invertebrate size upon rewetting in all treatment channels and (iii) a negative correlation between resilience and water table depth. This experiment highlighted the potential importance of the hyporheic zone as a key source of colonisation in alluvial rivers and emphasises the need for a three-dimensional perspective when considering community resilience in rivers. Adaptive management approaches are needed to direct attention to sources (e.g. hyporheic zone) that are essential to promoting community resilience in rivers facing increased pressures due to climate change, water abstraction and flow regime alteration.
TC 24
Z9 24
SN 0046-5070
EI 1365-2427
PD AUG
PY 2016
VL 61
IS 8
SI SI
BP 1276
EP 1292
DI 10.1111/fwb.12658
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000379953800008
ER

PT J
AU Wang, Z
   Xu, GJ
   Xu, HL
AF Wang, Zheng
   Xu, Guanjian
   Xu, Henglong
TI Temporal variation in body-size spectrum of biofilm-dwelling protozoa
   during the colonization process in coastal waters of the Yellow Sea,
   northern China
SO JOURNAL OF THE MARINE BIOLOGICAL ASSOCIATION OF THE UNITED KINGDOM
DT Article
DE biofilm-dwelling protozoa; body-size spectrum; field community;
   functional ecology; colonization survey
ID ENVIRONMENTAL-QUALITY STATUS; ENUMERATION TIME PERIODS; CILIATE
   COMMUNITIES; MARINE BIOASSESSMENT; ARTIFICIAL SUBSTRATUM; JIAOZHOU BAY;
   SPECIES POOL; PATTERNS; ZOOPLANKTON; DISPERSIONS
AB As an inherent function of a community, body-size spectrum has been increasingly used as a useful indicator in global ecological research. The colonization dynamics of biofilm-dwelling protozoa with regard to body-size spectrum were studied based on a 1-month baseline survey in coastal waters of the Yellow Sea, northern China. Samples were collected at time intervals of 1, 3, 7, 10, 14, 21 and 28 days from depths of 1 and 3 m. A total of seven body-size ranks were identified based on a trait hierarchy. The individual abundance of the protozoa at each body-size rank was well fitted to the logistic model equation. The body-size spectra showed a clear shift in probability density during the colonization period at both depths. The multivariate approach demonstrated that the temporal dynamics in body-size spectra of the protozoa may be divided into initial (1 day), transitional (3-7 days) and stable (10-28 days) stages during the colonization period. These results provide useful information for ecological research and monitoring programmes using biofilm-dwelling protozoa in marine ecosystems.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0025-3154
EI 1469-7769
PD AUG
PY 2016
VL 96
IS 5
BP 1113
EP 1118
DI 10.1017/S0025315416000278
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000379985400010
ER

PT J
AU Otegui, MBP
   Brauko, KM
   Pagliosa, PR
AF Otegui, Mariana B. P.
   Brauko, Kalina M.
   Pagliosa, Paulo R.
TI Matching ecological functioning with polychaete morphology: Consistency
   patterns along sedimentary habitats
SO JOURNAL OF SEA RESEARCH
DT Article
DE Morphology; Biological traits; Polychaetes; Soft-bottom; Functional
   diversity
ID MARINE BENTHIC ECOSYSTEMS; BIOLOGICAL TRAITS; FEEDING GUILDS; DIVERSITY;
   BIODIVERSITY; ASSEMBLAGES; SCALE; ECOMORPHOLOGY; COMMUNITIES; REDUNDANCY
AB The relationship between form and function is usually evident and reflect causal relationships in ecological interactions. However, the consistency of the taxonomical and functional approaches versus a morphological approach is yet to be assessed and applied to benthic-sediment relationships. Here, we propose a new functional classification based on morphological characteristics using polychaetes. To test the validity of the framework we assess the consistency between polychaete responses to distinct sedimentary environments using morphological, taxonomical and biological traits approaches, and comparing the patterns of polychaete responses at local and regional scales. The selected morphological characteristics were pharynx complexity, jaws presence, feeding palps, head appendages, body appendages, body support structures, branchiae and body regionalization, as well as number of segments, which were categorized according to presence, size, number or type of structure. The novel morphological method was successfully applied and all analyses showed consistent faunal patterns of variation along muddy and sandy habitats at the distinct spatial scales. Nevertheless, in the three case studies the morphological method explained more over the general variability and was more concise than the other two methods, emphasizing the reliability of a functional approach. The distinct set of morphological characteristics found in muddy and sandy habitats reflected two different ecological roles of polychaetes. Discretely motile, small sized and of low sensibility polychaetes prevailed in muddy habitats, while sandy sediments were dominated by organisms with richer and more heterogeneous characteristics. The responses of the morphological analysis were very similar to the taxonomical and biological traits analysis, but with a much higher explanatory power, meaning that morphology provides a robust approach for studying the ecological functionality of marine benthic systems. (C) 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
RI Pagliosa, Paulo/E-1948-2013
OI Pagliosa, Paulo/0000-0003-0834-2534
TC 5
Z9 5
SN 1385-1101
EI 1873-1414
PD AUG
PY 2016
VL 114
BP 13
EP 21
DI 10.1016/j.seares.2016.05.001
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000379635200002
ER

PT J
AU Ieromina, O
   Musters, CJM
   Bodegom, PM
   Peijnenburg, WJGM
   Vijver, MG
AF Ieromina, O.
   Musters, C. J. M.
   Bodegom, P. M.
   Peijnenburg, W. J. G. M.
   Vijver, M. G.
TI Trait modality distribution of aquatic macrofauna communities as
   explained by pesticides and water chemistry
SO ECOTOXICOLOGY
DT Article
DE Aquatic community; Traits; Pesticides stress; Environmental factors;
   Nutrients
ID SPECIES TRAITS; STREAM MACROINVERTEBRATES; INVERTEBRATE COMMUNITIES;
   BIOLOGICAL TRAITS; DAPHNIA-MAGNA; RESPONSES; ECOSYSTEMS; FRAMEWORK;
   PATTERNS; DITCHES
AB Analyzing functional species' characteristics (species traits) that represent physiological, life history and morphological characteristics of species help understanding the impacts of various stressors on aquatic communities at field conditions. This research aimed to study the combined effects of pesticides and other environmental factors (temperature, dissolved oxygen, dissolved organic carbon, floating macrophytes cover, phosphate, nitrite, and nitrate) on the trait modality distribution of aquatic macrofauna communities. To this purpose, a field inventory was performed in a flower bulb growing area of the Netherlands with significant variation in pesticides pressures. Macrofauna community composition, water chemistry parameters and pesticide concentrations in ditches next to flower bulb fields were determined. Trait modalities of nine traits (feeding mode, respiration mode, locomotion type, resistance form, reproduction mode, life stage, voltinism, saprobity, maximum body size) likely to indicate pesticides impacts were analyzed. According to a redundancy analysis, phosphate -and not pesticides- constituted the main factor structuring the trait modality distribution of aquatic macrofauna. The functional composition could be ascribed for 2-4 % to pesticides, and for 3-11 % to phosphate. The lack of trait responses to pesticides may indicate that species may have used alternative strategies to adapt to ambient pesticides stress. Biomass of animals exhibiting trait modalities related to feeding by predation and grazing, presence of diapause form or dormancy, reproduction by free clutches and ovoviviparity, life stage of larvae and pupa, was negatively correlated to the concentration of phosphate. Hence, despite the high pesticide pollution in the area, variation in nutrient-related stressors seems to be the dominant driver of the functional composition of aquatic macrofauna assembly in agricultural ditches.
RI Musters, Cornelis/K-7828-2013; van Bodegom, Peter/N-8150-2015
OI van Bodegom, Peter/0000-0003-0771-4500; Ieromina,
   Oleksandra/0000-0002-3501-1362; peijnenburg, willie/0000-0003-2958-9149
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 0963-9292
EI 1573-3017
PD AUG
PY 2016
VL 25
IS 6
BP 1170
EP 1180
DI 10.1007/s10646-016-1671-5
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Toxicology
UT WOS:000379031600011
PM 27209569
ER

PT J
AU Stepien, CC
   Pfister, CA
   Wootton, JT
AF Stepien, Courtney C.
   Pfister, Catherine A.
   Wootton, J. Timothy
TI Functional Traits for Carbon Access in Macrophytes
SO PLOS ONE
DT Article
ID OCEAN ACIDIFICATION; INORGANIC CARBON; CONCENTRATING MECHANISMS; MARINE
   MACROALGAE; CORALLINE ALGAE; BOUNDARY-LAYERS; PHOTOSYNTHESIS; EVOLUTION;
   GROWTH; PATTERNS
AB Understanding functional trait distributions among organisms can inform impacts on and responses to environmental change. In marine systems, only 1% of dissolved inorganic carbon in seawater exists as CO2. Thus the majority of marine macrophytes not only passively access CO2 for photosynthesis, but also actively transport CO2 and the more common bicarbonate (HCO3-, 92% of seawater dissolved inorganic carbon) into their cells. Because species with these carbon concentrating mechanisms (CCMs) are non-randomly distributed in ecosystems, we ask whether there is a phylogenetic pattern to the distribution of CCMs among algal species. To determine macrophyte traits that influence carbon uptake, we assessed 40 common macrophyte species from the rocky intertidal community of the Northeast Pacific Ocean to a) query whether macrophytes have a CCM and b) determine the evolutionary history of CCMs, using ancestral state reconstructions and stochastic character mapping based on previously published data. Thirty-two species not only depleted CO2, but also concentrated and depleted HCO3-, indicative of a CCM. While analysis of CCMs as a continuous trait in 30 families within Phylum Rhodophyta showed a significant phylogenetic signal under a Brownian motion model, analysis of CCMs as a discrete trait (presence or absence) indicated that red algal families are more divergent than expected in their CCM presence or absence; CCMs are a labile trait within the Rhodophyta. In contrast, CCMs were present in each of 18 Ochrophyta families surveyed, indicating that CCMs are highly conserved in the brown algae. The trait of CCM presence or absence was largely conserved within Families. Fifteen of 23 species tested also changed the seawater buffering capacity, or Total Alkalinity (TA), shifting DIC composition towards increasing concentrations of HCO3- and CO2 for photosynthesis. Manipulating the external TA of the local environment may influence carbon availability in boundary layers and areas of low water mixing, offering an additional mechanism to increase CO2 availability.
TC 7
Z9 7
SN 1932-6203
PD JUL 14
PY 2016
VL 11
IS 7
AR e0159062
DI 10.1371/journal.pone.0159062
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000379579500067
PM 27415005
ER

PT J
AU Smith, SL
   Pahlow, M
   Merico, A
   Acevedo-Trejos, E
   Sasai, Y
   Yoshikawa, C
   Sasaoka, K
   Fujiki, T
   Matsumoto, K
   Honda, MC
AF Smith, S. Lan
   Pahlow, Markus
   Merico, Agostino
   Acevedo-Trejos, Esteban
   Sasai, Yoshikazu
   Yoshikawa, Chisato
   Sasaoka, Kosei
   Fujiki, Tetsuichi
   Matsumoto, Kazuhiko
   Honda, Makio C.
TI Contribution to the Themed Section: Advances in Plankton Modelling and
   Biodiversity Evaluation Flexible phytoplankton functional type (FlexPFT)
   model: size-scaling of traits and optimal growth
SO JOURNAL OF PLANKTON RESEARCH
DT Article; Proceedings Paper
CT CREST Symposium
CY OCT 21-23, 2014
CL Tokyo Univ Marine Sci & Technol, Shinagawa Campus, Tokyo, JAPAN
HO Tokyo Univ Marine Sci & Technol, Shinagawa Campus
DE phytoplankton; ecosystem model; trait; acclimation; size-scaling
ID NUTRIENT-UPTAKE; DYNAMICS; KINETICS; COMMUNITIES; DIVERSITY; MICROBES;
   OCEAN
AB Recent studies have analysed valuable compilations of data for the size-scaling of phytoplankton traits, but these cannot be employed directly in most large-scale modelling studies, which typically do not explicitly resolve the relevant trait values. Although some recent large-scale modelling studies resolve species composition and sorting within communities, most do not account for the observed flexible response of phytoplankton communities, such as the dynamic acclimation often observed in laboratory experiments. In order to derive a simple yet flexible model of phytoplankton growth that can be useful for a wide variety of ocean modelling applications, we combine two trade-offs, one for growth and the other for nutrient uptake, under the optimality assumption, i.e. that intracellular resources are dynamically allocated to maximize growth rate. This yields an explicit equation for growth as a function of nutrient concentration and daily averaged irradiance. We furthermore show how with this model effective Monod parameter values depend on both the underlying trait values and environmental conditions. We apply this new model to two contrasting time-series observation sites, including idealized simulations of size diversity. The flexible model responds differently compared with an inflexible control, suggesting that acclimation by individual species could impact models of plankton diversity.
RI Smith, S./D-2493-2012
OI Smith, S./0000-0002-2338-5893; Merico, Agostino/0000-0001-8095-8056;
   Trainer, Clarivate/0000-0001-9593-4831
TC 11
Z9 11
SN 0142-7873
EI 1464-3774
PD JUL-AUG
PY 2016
VL 38
IS 4
BP 977
EP 992
DI 10.1093/plankt/fbv038
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000381692300017
ER

PT J
AU Gusmao, JB
   Brauko, KM
   Eriksson, BK
   Lana, PC
AF Gusmao, Joao B.
   Brauko, Kalina M.
   Eriksson, Britas K.
   Lana, Paulo C.
TI Functional diversity of macrobenthic assemblages decreases in response
   to sewage discharges
SO ECOLOGICAL INDICATORS
DT Article
DE Tidal flats; Functional traits; Functional diversity; Organic pollution;
   Benthic health; Macroinvertebrates; Estuaries
ID MARINE BIOTIC INDEX; TRAITS ANALYSIS BTA; BIOLOGICAL TRAITS;
   SPECIES-DIVERSITY; BENTHIC COMMUNITIES; MULTIPLE TRAITS; FECAL STEROIDS;
   FEEDING GUILDS; FRAMEWORK; ESTUARINE
AB We analyzed the effects of sewage discharge on a subtropical estuary by comparing the functional diversity of intertidal macroinvertebrate assemblages in contaminated with non-contaminated reference areas. Functional structure was assessed using biological traits analysis (BTA) and four multivariate indices (FRic, FEve, FDis and Rao's Q) of functional diversity. Our results showed clear and temporally consistent changes in macrobenthic functional structure in contaminated areas. However, these results depended on whether abundance- or biomass-based measurements were used, with abundance-based analyses distinguishing most clearly between sewage contamination conditions. Differences between contaminated and non-contaminated conditions were also displayed by BTA for all the functional trait categories. FDis (functional divergence) and Rao's Q (functional dispersion) were higher in the non contaminated condition and increased with higher benthic environmental health, as measured by the AMBI index. These patterns of higher functional divergence and dispersion were driven by the numerical dominance of opportunistic annelids in the contaminated condition. We suggest that abundance-based BTA, and the FDis and/or Rao's Q indices are reliable approaches to detect changes in functional structure with respect to sewage pollution. They have a great potential for environmental assessment and monitoring of subtropical estuarine ecosystems. (C) 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
RI Eriksson, Britas Klemens/D-8601-2015
OI Eriksson, Britas Klemens/0000-0003-4752-922X; Gusmao,
   Joao/0000-0002-6854-8529
TC 15
Z9 15
SN 1470-160X
EI 1872-7034
PD JUL
PY 2016
VL 66
BP 65
EP 75
DI 10.1016/j.ecolind.7.016.01.003
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000388912300007
ER

PT J
AU Passos, CVB
   Fabre, NN
   Malhado, ACM
   Batista, VS
   Ladle, RJ
AF Passos, C. V. B.
   Fabre, N. N.
   Malhado, A. C. M.
   Batista, V. S.
   Ladle, R. J.
TI Estuarization increases functional diversity of demersal fish
   assemblages in tropical coastal ecosystems
SO JOURNAL OF FISH BIOLOGY
DT Article; Proceedings Paper
CT Symposium on Fish and Aquatic Habitat Conservation in South America
   during the 21st Brazilian Ichthyology Meeting
CY 2015
CL Recife, BRAZIL
DE assembly rules; coastal zone; continental shelves; environmental
   filtering; species diversity
ID LIMITING SIMILARITY; MANGROVE CREEKS; COMMUNITY; TRAITS; PLANT; ECOLOGY;
   ESTUARY; ICHTHYOPLANKTON; VARIABILITY; REDUNDANCY
AB This study assessed the influence of the seasonal fluctuation of abiotic conditions (wet v. dry season) on the functional diversity (FD) of tropical coastal fish assemblages. Sampling was carried out in three regions of north-east Brazil with contrasting coastlines (influenced by reef, lagoon and estuary). In each region, fishes were sampled from three depth strata (10, 20 and 30m) and FD was estimated using an index based on key phenotypic and behavioural characteristics. All three regions had higher FD in the wet season at shallower depths, indicating the coexistence of species with low functional redundancy in sites subject to seasonal flushing of fresh water. Deeper sites had lower FD than shallower sites, although this difference was less pronounced for region 3, which is strongly affected by its proximity to the Sao Francisco estuary. The results broadly support the hypothesis that alterations in abiotic conditions in the wet season allow estuarine-adapted fishes with a different suite of functional traits to invade shallow coastal regions. (C) 2016 The Fisheries Society of the British Isles
RI Batista, Vandick/G-9749-2012; Malhado, Ana/I-3089-2012; Fabre, Nidia
   Noemi/K-3554-2012
OI Batista, Vandick/0000-0002-1183-1067; Malhado, Ana/0000-0003-3621-779X;
   Fabre, Nidia Noemi/0000-0002-4954-2236; Ladle,
   Richard/0000-0003-3200-3946
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 0022-1112
EI 1095-8649
PD JUL
PY 2016
VL 89
IS 1
SI SI
BP 847
EP 862
DI 10.1111/jfb.13029
SC Fisheries; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000384307300050
PM 27278251
ER

PT J
AU Santos, AMC
   Field, R
   Ricklefs, RE
AF Santos, Ana M. C.
   Field, Richard
   Ricklefs, Robert E.
TI New directions in island biogeography
SO GLOBAL ECOLOGY AND BIOGEOGRAPHY
DT Article
DE Climatic niche; community assembly; equilibrium theory of island
   biogeography; evolutionary processes; general dynamic model; invasive
   species; marine environments; natural laboratories; species-area
   relationship; species interactions
ID SPECIES-AREA RELATIONSHIP; LONG-DISTANCE DISPERSAL; GENERAL
   DYNAMIC-MODEL; ECOLOGICAL CHARACTER DISPLACEMENT; TROPICAL FOREST
   SUCCESSION; UNIFIED-NEUTRAL-THEORY; REEF-FISH COMMUNITIES; ADAPTIVE
   RADIATION; OCEANIC ISLANDS; ASSEMBLY RULES
AB Aim Much of our current understanding of ecological and evolutionary processes comes from island research. With the increasing availability of data on distributions and phylogenetic relationships and new analytical approaches to understanding the processes that shape species distributions and interactions, a re-evaluation of this ever-interesting topic is timely.
   Location Islands globally.
   Methods We start by arguing that the reasons why island research has achieved so much in the past also apply to the future. We then critically assess the current state of island biogeography, focusing on recent changes in emphasis, including research featured in this special issue of Global Ecology and Biogeography. Finally, we suggest promising themes for the future. We cover both ecological and evolutionary topics, although the greater emphasis on island ecology reflects our own backgrounds and interests.
   Results Much ecological theory has been directly or indirectly influenced by research on island biotas. Currently, island biogeography is renascent, with research focusing on, among other things, patterns and processes underlying species interaction networks, species coexistence and the assembly of island communities through ecological and evolutionary time. Continuing island research should provide additional insight into biological invasions and other impacts of human activities, functional diversity and ecosystem functioning, extinction and diversification, species pools and more. Deeper understanding of the similarities and differences between island and mainland systems will aid transferability of island theory to continental regions.
   Main conclusions As research in biogeography and related fields expands in new directions, islands continue to provide opportunities for developing insights, both as natural laboratories for ecology and evolution and because of the exceptions islands often present to the usual 'rules' of ecology. New data collection initiatives are needed on islands world-wide and should be directed towards filling gaps in our knowledge of within-island distributions of species, as well as the functional traits and phylogenetic relationships of island species.
RI Santos, Ana/E-7598-2010
OI Santos, Ana/0000-0002-9197-792X
TC 9
Z9 11
SN 1466-822X
EI 1466-8238
PD JUL
PY 2016
VL 25
IS 7
SI SI
BP 751
EP 768
DI 10.1111/geb.12477
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Physical Geography
UT WOS:000383516500001
ER

PT J
AU Mendoza-Carranza, M
   Santiago-Alarcon, D
   Perez-Jimenez, JC
   Hernandez-Lazo, CC
AF Mendoza-Carranza, Manuel
   Santiago-Alarcon, Diego
   Carlos Perez-Jimenez, Juan
   Carolina Hernandez-Lazo, Chrystian
TI Eyeless morphotype in the southern stingray (Dasyatis americana): a
   non-lethal and frequent abnormality from the southern Gulf of Mexico
SO LATIN AMERICAN JOURNAL OF AQUATIC RESEARCH
DT Article
DE Dasyatidae; mutation; visual-sense; barcodingene; Campeche Bank; Gulf of
   Mexico
ID OIL-SPILL; MORPHOLOGICAL ABNORMALITY; POPULATION-STRUCTURE;
   MAXIMUM-LIKELIHOOD; 1ST RECORD; FISH; DNA; CHONDRICHTHYES;
   ELASMOBRANCHS; PHYLOGEOGRAPHY
AB Elasmobranchs are active predators that depend on a highly developed visual system. The eyes of the southern stingray, Dasyatis americana, are adapted to a changing light environment in coastal zones. In this study we use morphological characters and molecular methods (mtDNA COI) to describe an eyeless morphotype of D. americana from six individuals collected from commercial small-scale fisheries on the Campeche Bank (southern Gulf of Mexico). Additionally to the eyeless characteristic, both regular (presence of eye) and eyeless (absence of eye) morphotypes have contrasting quantitative values and qualitative features for different phenotypic traits (color, teeth number, pelvic fin and spiracle form). Mature female and male eyeless morphotype had functional internal reproductive structures. Using the bar code gene, we found conclusive evidence that the eyeless morphotype belongs to the species D. americana. This is the first report on reproductively functional eyeless individuals of this species or close relatives elsewhere, which live sympatrically with regular D. americana individuals in the southern Gulf of Mexico.
RI Santiago-Alarcon, Diego/G-2485-2018
OI Santiago-Alarcon, Diego/0000-0002-4914-5580
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0718-560X
EI 0717-7178
PD JUL
PY 2016
VL 44
IS 3
BP 460
EP 469
DI 10.3856/vol44-issue3-fulltext-4
SC Fisheries; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000383769200004
ER

PT J
AU Park, SY
   Patnaik, BB
   Kang, SW
   Hwang, HJ
   Chung, JM
   Song, DK
   Sang, MK
   Patnaik, HH
   Lee, JB
   Noh, MY
   Kim, C
   Kim, S
   Park, HS
   Lee, JS
   Han, YS
   Lee, YS
AF Park, So Young
   Patnaik, Bharat Bhusan
   Kang, Se Won
   Hwang, Hee-Ju
   Chung, Jong Min
   Song, Dae Kwon
   Sang, Min Kyu
   Patnaik, Hongray Howrelia
   Lee, Jae Bong
   Noh, Mi Young
   Kim, Changmu
   Kim, Soonok
   Park, Hong Seog
   Lee, Jun Sang
   Han, Yeon Soo
   Lee, Yong Seok
TI Transcriptomic Analysis of the Endangered Neritid Species Clithon
   retropictus: De Novo Assembly, Functional Annotation, and Marker
   Discovery
SO GENES
DT Article
DE Clithon retropictus; transcriptome; de novo assembly; functional
   annotation; simple sequence repeats
ID GENE ONTOLOGY; KYOTO ENCYCLOPEDIA; IDENTIFICATION; GENOMES; BIOLOGY;
   SYSTEM; KEGG
AB An aquatic gastropod belonging to the family Neritidae, Clithon retropictus is listed as an endangered class II species in South Korea. The lack of information on its genomic background limits the ability to obtain functional data resources and inhibits informed conservation planning for this species. In the present study, the transcriptomic sequencing and de novo assembly of C. retropictus generated a total of 241,696,750 high-quality reads. These assembled to 282,838 unigenes with mean and N50 lengths of 736.9 and 1201 base pairs, respectively. Of these, 125,616 unigenes were subjected to annotation analysis with known proteins in Protostome DB, COG, GO, and KEGG protein databases (BLASTX; E <= 0.00001) and with known nucleotides in the Unigene database (BLASTN; E <= 0.00001). The GO analysis indicated that cellular process, cell, and catalytic activity are the predominant GO terms in the biological process, cellular component, and molecular function categories, respectively. In addition, 2093 unigenes were distributed in 107 different KEGG pathways. Furthermore, 49,280 simple sequence repeats were identified in the unigenes (>1 kilobase sequences). This is the first report on the identification of transcriptomic and microsatellite resources for C. retropictus, which opens up the possibility of exploring traits related to the adaptation and acclimatization of this species.
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 2073-4425
PD JUL
PY 2016
VL 7
IS 7
AR 35
DI 10.3390/genes7070035
SC Genetics & Heredity
UT WOS:000381493100006
PM 27455329
ER

PT J
AU Bonachela, JA
   Klausmeier, CA
   Edwards, KF
   Litchman, E
   Levin, SA
AF Bonachela, Juan A.
   Klausmeier, Christopher A.
   Edwards, Kyle F.
   Litchman, Elena
   Levin, Simon A.
TI Contribution to the Themed Section: Advances in Plankton Modelling and
   Biodiversity Evaluation REVIEW The role of phytoplankton diversity in
   the emergent oceanic stoichiometry
SO JOURNAL OF PLANKTON RESEARCH
DT Article; Proceedings Paper
CT CREST Symposium
CY OCT 21-23, 2014
CL Tokyo Univ Marine Sci & Technol, Shinagawa Campus, Tokyo, JAPAN
HO Tokyo Univ Marine Sci & Technol, Shinagawa Campus
DE stoichiometry; trait-based models; redfield; phytoplankton
ID N-P STOICHIOMETRY; TO-PHOSPHORUS STOICHIOMETRY; EVOLUTIONARY
   INHERITANCE; ELEMENTAL STOICHIOMETRY; CHEMICAL-COMPOSITION; LIGHT
   COLIMITATION; ADAPTIVE DYNAMICS; GLOBAL PATTERNS; NUTRIENT-UPTAKE;
   SUPPLY RATIO
AB Marine phytoplankton are a taxonomically and functionally diverse group of organisms that are key players in the most important biogeochemical cycles. Phytoplankton taxa show different resource utilization strategies (e.g. nutrient-uptake rates and cellular allocation) and traits. Therefore, acknowledging this diversity is crucial to understanding how elemental cycles operate, including the origin and dynamics of elemental ratios. In this paper, we focus on trait-based models as tools to study the role of phytoplankton diversity in the stoichiometric phenomenology observed in the laboratory and in the open ocean. We offer a compilation of known empirical results on stoichiometry and summarize how trait-based approaches have attempted to replicate these results. By contrasting the different ecological and evolutionary approaches available in the literature, we explore the strengths and limitations of the existing models. We thus try to identify existing gaps and challenges, and point to potential new directions that can be explored to fill these gaps. We aim to highlight the potential of including diversity explicitly in our modeling approaches, which can help us gain important knowledge about changes in local and global stoichiometric patterns.
OI Bonachela, Juan/0000-0002-3316-8120
TC 13
Z9 13
SN 0142-7873
EI 1464-3774
PD JUL-AUG
PY 2016
VL 38
IS 4
BP 1021
EP 1035
DI 10.1093/plankt/fbv087
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000381692300020
ER

PT J
AU Johnson, CA
   Coutinho, RM
   Berlin, E
   Dolphin, KE
   Heyer, J
   Kim, B
   Leung, A
   Sabellon, JL
   Amarasekare, P
AF Johnson, Christopher A.
   Coutinho, Renato M.
   Berlin, Erin
   Dolphin, Kimberly E.
   Heyer, Johanna
   Kim, Britney
   Leung, Alice
   Sabellon, Jamie Lou
   Amarasekare, Priyanga
TI Effects of temperature and resource variation on insect population
   dynamics: the bordered plant bug as a case study
SO FUNCTIONAL ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE competition; ectotherms; environmental variability; life-history traits;
   mathematical modelling; population dynamics; resource variability;
   temperature variation
ID LIFE TABLE PARAMETERS; DIAPREPES-ABBREVIATUS COLEOPTERA; RECENT
   CLIMATE-CHANGE; SYSTEMATIC FORMULATION; CONSTANT TEMPERATURES; DEPENDENT
   DEVELOPMENT; FUNCTIONAL-RESPONSE; HYMENOPTERA; HISTORY; HEMIPTERA
AB In species with complex life cycles, population dynamics result from a combination of intrinsic cycles arising from delays in the operation of negative density-dependent processes (e.g. intraspecific competition) and extrinsic fluctuations arising from seasonal variation in the abiotic environment. Abiotic variation can affect species directly through their life-history traits and indirectly by modulating the species' interactions with resources or natural enemies. We investigate how the interplay between density-dependent dynamics and abiotic variability affects population dynamics of the bordered plant bug (Largus californicus), a Hemipteran herbivore inhabiting the California coastal sage scrub community. Field data show a striking pattern in abundance: adults are extremely abundant or nearly absent during certain periods of the year, leading us to predict that seasonal forcing plays a role in driving observed dynamics. We develop a stage-structured population model with variable developmental delays, in which fecundity is affected by both intraspecific competition and temporal variation in resource availability and all life-history traits (reproduction, development, mortality) are temperature-dependent. We parameterize the model with experimental data on temperature responses of life-history and competitive traits and validate the model with independent field census data. We find that intraspecific competition is strongest at temperatures optimal for reproduction, which theory predicts leads to more complex population dynamics. Our model predicts that while temperature resource variability interacts with development-induced delays in self-limitation to generate population fluctuations, it is the interplay between all three factors that drive the observed dynamics. Considering how multiple abiotic factors interact with density-dependent processes is important both for understanding how species persist in variable environments and predicting species' responses to perturbations in their typical environment.
RI Coutinho, Renato/H-9133-2017
OI Coutinho, Renato/0000-0002-2828-8558
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 0269-8463
EI 1365-2435
PD JUL
PY 2016
VL 30
IS 7
BP 1122
EP 1131
DI 10.1111/1365-2435.12583
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000379978100011
PM 28824219
ER

PT J
AU Mahdavi, P
   Bergmeier, E
AF Mahdavi, P.
   Bergmeier, E.
TI Plant functional traits and diversity in sand dune ecosystems across
   different biogeographic regions
SO ACTA OECOLOGICA-INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE Climatic region; Cluster analysis; Coastal vegetation; Functional group;
   Habitat filter; Sand dunes
ID LAND-USE CHANGE; CLASSIFICATION; DISTURBANCE; VEGETATION; WORLDWIDE;
   METACOMMUNITIES; DISTRIBUTIONS; BIODIVERSITY; FOREDUNES; DYNAMICS
AB Plant species of a functional group respond similarly to environmental pressures and may be expected to act similarly on ecosystem processes and habitat properties. However, feasibility and applicability of functional groups in ecosystems across very different climatic regions have not yet been studied. In our approach we specified the functional groups in sand dune ecosystems of the Mediterranean, Hyrcanian and Irano-Turanian phytogeographic regions. We examined whether functional groups are more influenced by region or rather by habitat characteristics, and identified trait syndromes associated with common habitat types in sand dunes (mobile dunes, stabilized dunes, salt marshes, semi-wet sands, disturbed habitats). A database of 14 traits, 309 species and 314 releves was examined and trait-species, trait-plot and species-plot matrices were built. Cluster analysis revealed similar plant functional groups in sand dune ecosystems across regions of very different species composition and climate. Specifically, our study showed that plant traits in sand dune ecosystems are grouped reflecting habitat affiliation rather than region and species pool. Environmental factors and constraints such as sand mobility, soil salinity, water availability, nutrient status and disturbance are more important for the occurrence and distribution of plant functional groups than regional belonging. Each habitat is shown to be equipped with specific functional groups and can be described by specific sets of traits. In restoration ecology the completeness of functional groups and traits in a site may serve as a guideline for maintaining or restoring the habitat. (C) 2016 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.
TC 5
Z9 6
SN 1146-609X
EI 1873-6238
PD JUL
PY 2016
VL 74
BP 37
EP 45
DI 10.1016/j.actao.2016.06.003
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000380082200005
ER

PT J
AU Bona, F
   Doretto, A
   Falasco, E
   La Morgia, V
   Piano, E
   Ajassa, R
   Fenoglio, S
AF Bona, F.
   Doretto, A.
   Falasco, E.
   La Morgia, V.
   Piano, E.
   Ajassa, R.
   Fenoglio, S.
TI Increased Sediment Loads in Alpine Streams: An Integrated Field Study
SO RIVER RESEARCH AND APPLICATIONS
DT Article
DE allochthonous inputs; autochthonous inputs; diatoms; fine sediments;
   macroinvertebrates; path analysis; rock quarries
ID DEPOSITED FINE SEDIMENT; CO-INERTIA ANALYSIS; SPAWNING HABITAT; MOUNTAIN
   STREAMS; AQUATIC BIOTA; MACROINVERTEBRATES; INVERTEBRATES; QUALITY;
   BIOMASS; ENVIRONMENT
AB The ecological impact of fine sediments is one of the major causes of ecological degradation affecting lotic systems. Interestingly, many studies have investigated the impact of increased sediment loads on specific compartments of the lotic system, but little or no information is available about the overall impact of sedimentation. Aim of this paper was to analyse the influence of fine sedimentation on allochthonous and autochthonous energy inputs and on the structural and functional characteristics of diatom and macroinvertebrate communities. Data were collected in two Alpine streams in NW Italy, one interested by the presence of an intense mining area and the other pristine, used as a control. The two rivers greatly differed in terms of suspended solids and bed load characteristics. From 10 stations, we analysed main physico-chemical characteristics, fine sediment indicators (using 60 sediment traps), coarse particulate organic matter (CPOM) and photosynthetic pigments amounts, taxonomic and functional characteristics of macroinvertebrate communities. We tested several causal models via path analysis. Functional traits seem to better reflect the integrated impact originating from quarries in the river basin than traditional community metrics like total abundance and specific richness. This outcome was enforced through the co-inertia analysis, which took in consideration also metrics based on diatom communities. Our study yielded quantitative relations between sediment loads induced by quarrying activities and the degree of biological impairment and suggests which metrics are more suitable to assess this specific impact. Copyright (c) 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
OI La Morgia, Valentina/0000-0001-9915-3194; Piano,
   Elena/0000-0002-4685-7240; Bona, Francesca/0000-0003-2260-8001
TC 8
Z9 8
SN 1535-1459
EI 1535-1467
PD JUL
PY 2016
VL 32
IS 6
BP 1316
EP 1326
DI 10.1002/rra.2941
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Water Resources
UT WOS:000379952900016
ER

PT J
AU Ross, MS
   Sah, JP
   Ruiz, PL
   Spitzig, AA
   Subedi, SC
AF Ross, Michael S.
   Sah, Jay P.
   Ruiz, Pablo L.
   Spitzig, Adam A.
   Subedi, Suresh C.
TI Inferring implications of climate change in south Florida hardwood
   hammocks through analysis of metacommunity structure
SO DIVERSITY AND DISTRIBUTIONS
DT Article
DE community-aggregated functional traits; dispersal limitation;
   metacommunity structure; nestedness; species-area relationship; tree
   islands
ID EVERGLADES ECOSYSTEM; PLANT-COMMUNITIES; SEED DISPERSAL; PATTERNS;
   GRADIENTS; EDGE; TREE; SEA; FRAGMENTATION; BIODIVERSITY
AB Aim In order to explore how variation in regional biogeography would affect forest responses to climate change, we analysed metacommunity structure of trees in natural forest fragments across a boundary between tropical and subtropical temperature regimes. We wished to determine whether species assemblages were constrained by periodic cold temperatures, dispersal limitation and/or local processes associated with fragment size, and consider how these influences might affect future species migration and community reassembly.
   Location Southeastern Florida, USA.
   Methods We collected complete tree species lists for 144 forest fragments, from our own surveys supplemented by publicly available sources. The resulting species-by-site data matrix was re-ordered based on an ordination that identified the latent environmental axis most responsible for variation in composition, and metacommunity structure was analysed for coherence, turnover and range boundary clumping. Matrix structure was tested for associations with site variables, and with community-aggregated functional traits related to cold tolerance, dispersal limitation and fragment size.
   Results Forest patch size was the strongest single correlate with composition and species richness, but mean January temperature and a neighbourhood index denoting degree of isolation from other patches contributed significantly to regression models. The species-by-site matrix was highly nested, with trees common to small upland fragments in the Everglades interior representing a distinct subset of the richer assemblages found in sites closer to the coast. Interior forests were smaller, more isolated, and subject to cooler minimum temperatures than more coastal forests, and were comprised primarily of early-successional, animal dispersed species.
   Main conclusions While warming winter temperatures may relax some constraints on the northward migration of tropical species through the region, sea level rise will raise ground water levels, decreasing the size and number of suitable mesic patches, and increasing their isolation. The result will be a loss in tree species diversity, especially among late-successional, edge-sensitive species.
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 1366-9516
EI 1472-4642
PD JUL
PY 2016
VL 22
IS 7
BP 783
EP 796
DI 10.1111/ddi.12442
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000379615400005
ER

PT J
AU Foss-Grant, AP
   Zipkin, EF
   Thorson, JT
   Jensen, OP
   Fagan, WF
AF Foss-Grant, Andrew P.
   Zipkin, Elise F.
   Thorson, James T.
   Jensen, Olaf P.
   Fagan, William F.
TI Hierarchical analysis of taxonomic variation in intraspecific
   competition across fish species
SO ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE density-dependence; hierarchical model; intraspecific competition;
   stock-recruitment; recruitment compensation; Shepherd stock-recruitment
   model; stock assessment; meta-analysis
ID STOCK-RECRUITMENT RELATIONSHIPS; MAXIMUM REPRODUCTIVE RATE; EASTERN
   BERING-SEA; LIFE-HISTORY; POPULATION-DYNAMICS; DENSITY-DEPENDENCE;
   BODY-SIZE; BAYESIAN METAANALYSIS; CARRYING-CAPACITY; OCEAN CONDITIONS
AB The nature and intensity of intraspecific competition can vary greatly among taxa, yet similarities in these interactions can lead to similar population dynamics among related organisms. Variation along the spectrum of intraspecific competition, with contest and scramble competition as endpoints, leads to vastly different responses to population density. Here we investigated the diversity of intraspecific competition among fish species, predicting that functional forms of density-dependent reproduction would be conserved in related taxa. Using a hierarchical model that links stock-recruitment parameters among populations, species, and orders, we found that the strength of overcompensation, and therefore the type of intraspecific competition, is tightly clustered within taxonomic groupings, as species within an order share similar degrees of compensation. Specifically, species within the orders Salmoniformes and Pleuronectiformes exhibited density dependence indicative of scramble competition (overcompensation) while the orders Clupeiformes, Gadiformes, Perciformes, and Scorpaeniformes exhibited dynamics consistent with contest competition (compensation). Maximum potential recruitment also varied among orders, but with less clustering across species. We also tested whether stock-recruitment parameters correlated with maximum body length among species, but found no strong relationship. Our results suggest that much of the variation in the form of density-dependent reproduction among fish species may be predicted taxonomically due to evolved life history traits and reproductive behaviors.
RI Thorson, James/O-7937-2014
OI Thorson, James/0000-0001-7415-1010; Foss-Grant,
   Andrew/0000-0003-3271-6401
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 0012-9658
EI 1939-9170
PD JUL
PY 2016
VL 97
IS 7
BP 1724
EP 1734
DI 10.1890/15-0733.1
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000379323800010
PM 27859158
ER

PT J
AU Stoler, AB
   Burke, DJ
   Relyea, RA
AF Stoler, Aaron B.
   Burke, David J.
   Relyea, Rick A.
TI Litter chemistry and chemical diversity drive ecosystem processes in
   forest ponds
SO ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE amphibians; aquatic-terrestrial linkage; biodiversity; ecosystem
   functioning; detritivores; ephemeral pond; selection effects; snails;
   resource subsidies; temperate forests
ID LEAF-LITTER; FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; FRESH-WATER; COMMUNITY STRUCTURE;
   LARVAL AMPHIBIANS; SPECIES CHANGES; DECOMPOSITION; BIODIVERSITY; TRAITS;
   FRAMEWORK
AB Research suggests that a positive relationship exists between diversity and ecological function, yet the multi-trophic effects of biodiversity remain poorly understood. The resource complementarity hypothesis suggests that increasing the trait diversity of resources provides a more complete diet for consumers, elevating consumer feeding rates. Whereas previous tests of this mechanism have measured trait diversity as the variation of single traits or the richness of functional groups, we employed a multivariate trait index to manipulate the chemical diversity of temperate tree litter species in outdoor pond mesocosms. We inoculated outdoor mesocosms with diverse and multi-trophic communities of microbial and macro-consumer species that rely on leaf litter for energy and nutrients. Litter was provided at three levels of chemical trait diversity, a constant level of species richness, and an equal representation of all litter species. Over three months, we measured more than 65 responses, and assessed the effects of litter chemical diversity and chemical trait means (i.e., community-weighted means). We found that litter chemical diversity positively correlated with decomposition rate of leaf litter, but had no effect on biomass or density of producers and consumers. However, the pond communities often responded to chemical trait means, particularly those related to nutrients, structure, and defense. Our results suggest that resource complementarity does have some effect on the release of energy and nutrients from decomposing substrates in forest ponds, but does not have multi-trophic effects. Our results further suggest that loss of tree biodiversity could affect forest ecosystem functionality, and particularly the processes occurring in and around ponds and wetlands.
TC 10
Z9 10
SN 0012-9658
EI 1939-9170
PD JUL
PY 2016
VL 97
IS 7
BP 1783
EP 1795
DI 10.1890/15-1786.1
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000379323800015
PM 27859152
ER

PT J
AU Frainer, A
   Johansen, KS
   Siwertsson, A
   Mousavi, SK
   Brittain, JE
   Klemetsen, A
   Knudsen, R
   Amundsen, PA
AF Frainer, Andre
   Johansen, Kristin S.
   Siwertsson, Anna
   Mousavi, Seyed Karim
   Brittain, John E.
   Klemetsen, Anders
   Knudsen, Rune
   Amundsen, Per-Arne
TI Variation in functional trait composition of benthic invertebrates
   across depths and seasons in a subarctic lake
SO FUNDAMENTAL AND APPLIED LIMNOLOGY
DT Article
DE lentic benthic macroinvertebrates; seasonality; bathymetry; littoral
   habitats; functional traits
ID WATER-LEVEL FLUCTUATIONS; MACROINVERTEBRATE COMMUNITIES; SPECIES
   COMPOSITION; AQUATIC INSECTS; FEEDING ECOLOGY; DIVERSITY; DYNAMICS;
   CHARR; FISH; RESPONSES
AB Benthic invertebrate communities play a fundamental role in lake ecosystems, and the understanding of how those benthic communities are structured, particularly in terms of the identity and spatiotemporal distribution of their functional traits, is key to our understanding of how lake ecosystems work. In Takvatn, a subarctic lake in northern Norway, we identified the taxonomic and functional identity of the species characterizing benthic communities across three seasons and six different depths. Invertebrates were sampled using vacuum pump and Ekman grab. Despite the relative low species richness, we found large variation across depths and seasons in species functional composition using multivariate analyses. In all seasons and habitats, gathering traits were the most common feeding traits within the benthic community. The upper littoral habitat shifted from a community characterized by particle gathers and algal scrapers in spring and summer, to a community largely characterized by leaf shredders in autumn. There was also high relative occurrence of predator traits towards the deeper areas of the littoral zone, as well as in the sub-littoral and profundal habitats. The deeper habitats showed high variation in their taxonomic composition, but a stable composition of functional traits throughout all seasons. In conclusion, our study demonstrates large spatio-temporal differences in functional trait diversity and composition of the benthic invertebrates in Takvatn.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1863-9135
PD JUL
PY 2016
VL 188
IS 2
BP 103
EP 112
DI 10.1127/fal/2016/0839
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000378523600003
ER

PT J
AU Pivovaroff, AL
   Santiago, LS
   Vourlitis, GL
   Grantz, DA
   Allen, MF
AF Pivovaroff, Alexandria L.
   Santiago, Louis S.
   Vourlitis, George L.
   Grantz, David A.
   Allen, Michael F.
TI Plant hydraulic responses to long-term dry season nitrogen deposition
   alter drought tolerance in a Mediterranean-type ecosystem
SO OECOLOGIA
DT Article
DE Chaparral; Coastal sage scrub; Hydraulic conductivity; Photosynthesis;
   Water potentials
ID NET PRIMARY PRODUCTIVITY; WESTERN UNITED-STATES; SOUTHERN-CALIFORNIA;
   TERRESTRIAL ECOSYSTEMS; NUTRIENT AVAILABILITY; VULNERABILITY CURVES;
   XYLEM CAVITATION; N FERTILIZATION; WATER RELATIONS; PHOTOSYNTHESIS
AB Anthropogenic nitrogen (N) deposition represents a significant N input for many terrestrial ecosystems. N deposition can affect plants on scales ranging from photosynthesis to community composition, yet few studies have investigated how changes in N availability affect plant water relations. We tested the effects of N addition on plant water relations, hydraulic traits, functional traits, gas exchange, and leaf chemistry in a semi-arid ecosystem in Southern California using long-term experimental plots fertilized with N for over a decade. The dominant species were Artemisia california and Salvia mellifera at Santa Margarita Ecological Reserve and Adenostoma fasciculatum and Ceanothus greggii at Sky Oaks Field Station. All species, except Ceanothus, showed increased leaf N concentration, decreased foliar carbon to N ratio, and increased foliar N isotopic composition with fertilization, indicating that added N was taken up by study species, yet each species had a differing physiological response to long-term N addition. Dry season predawn water potentials were less negative with N addition for all species except Adenostoma, but there were no differences in midday water potentials, or wet season water potentials. Artemisia was particularly responsive, as N addition increased stem hydraulic conductivity, stomatal conductance, and leaf carbon isotopic composition, and decreased wood density. The alteration of water relations and drought resistance parameters with N addition in Artemisia, as well as Adenostoma, Ceanothus, and Salvia, indicate that N deposition can affect the ability of native Southern California shrubs to respond to drought.
TC 8
Z9 9
SN 0029-8549
EI 1432-1939
PD JUL
PY 2016
VL 181
IS 3
BP 721
EP 731
DI 10.1007/s00442-016-3609-2
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000378787700008
PM 27017604
ER

PT J
AU Sidney, LA
   Diepens, NJ
   Guo, XY
   Koelmans, AA
AF Sidney, Livia Alvarenga
   Diepens, Noel J.
   Guo, Xiaoying
   Koelmans, Albert A.
TI Trait-based modelling of bioaccumulation by freshwater benthic
   invertebrates
SO AQUATIC TOXICOLOGY
DT Article
DE Sediment test; Freshwater benthic invertebrates; Bioaccumulation;
   Modelling; Read across freshwater-marine
ID SEDIMENT ACCUMULATION FACTORS; POLYCYCLIC AROMATIC-HYDROCARBONS; MIDGE
   CHIRONOMUS-RIPARIUS; FIELD-COLLECTED SEDIMENT; LUMBRICULUS-VARIEGATUS;
   POLYCHLORINATED-BIPHENYLS; ORGANIC CONTAMINANTS; CARBON NANOTUBES;
   HYALELLA-AZTECA; FOOD WEBS
AB Understanding the role of species traits in chemical exposure is crucial for bioaccumulation and toxicity assessment of chemicals. We measured and modelled bioaccumulation of polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) in Chironomus riparius, Hyalella azteca, Lumbriculus variegatus and Sphaerium corneum. We used a battery test procedure with multiple enclosures in one aquarium, which maximized uniformity of exposure for the different species, such that the remaining variability was due mostly to species traits. The relative importance of uptake from either pore water or sediment ingestion was manipulated by using 28 d aged standard OECD sediment with low (1%) and medium (5%) OM content and 13 months aged sediment with medium OM (5%) content. Survival was >= 76% and wet weight increased for all species. Reproduction of H. azteca and weight gain of H. azteca and S. corneum were significantly higher in the medium OM aged sediments than in other sediments, perhaps due to a more developed microbial community (i.e., increase in food resources). Biota-sediment accumulation factors (BSAF) ranged from 3 to 114, depending on species and PCB congener, with C riparius (3-10)< S. corneum (10-17) <= L. variegatus (7-61) <= H. Azteca (5-114), thus challenging the presumed value of 1-2 typically employed in ecological risk assessment schemes. BSAFs for freshwater taxonomic groups were compared with their marine counterparts and showed overlapping values. The dynamic bioaccumulation model with species-specific bioaccumulation parameters fitted well to the experimental data and showed that bioaccumulation parameters were depended on species traits. Enclosure-based battery tests and mechanistic BSAF models are expected to improve the quality of the exposure assessment in whole sediment toxicity tests. (C) 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
TC 8
Z9 8
SN 0166-445X
EI 1879-1514
PD JUL
PY 2016
VL 176
BP 88
EP 96
DI 10.1016/j.aquatox.2016.04.017
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Toxicology
UT WOS:000377734500010
PM 27126443
ER

PT J
AU Laske, SM
   Haynes, TB
   Rosenberger, AE
   Koch, JC
   Wipfli, MS
   Whitman, M
   Zimmerman, CE
AF Laske, Sarah M.
   Haynes, Trevor B.
   Rosenberger, Amanda E.
   Koch, Joshua C.
   Wipfli, Mark S.
   Whitman, Matthew
   Zimmerman, Christian E.
TI Surface water connectivity drives richness and composition of Arctic
   lake fish assemblages
SO FRESHWATER BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE Arctic fish; fish assemblages; multispecies occupancy model; species
   richness; surface water connectivity
ID STICKLEBACK PUNGITIUS-PUNGITIUS; SPECIES RICHNESS; CLIMATE-CHANGE;
   REGIONAL INFLUENCES; COMMUNITY STRUCTURE; FLOODPLAIN LAKES; PATTERNS;
   STREAM; OCCUPANCY; DIVERSITY
AB Surface water connectivity can influence the richness and composition of fish assemblages, particularly in harsh environments where colonisation factors and access to seasonal refugia are required for species persistence. Studies regarding influence of connectivity on Arctic fish distributions are limited and are rarely applied to whole assemblage patterns. To increase our understanding of how surface water connectivity and related hydrologic variables influence assemblage patterns, we investigated species richness and composition of Arctic lake fishes over a large region, 8500km(2), of the central Arctic Coastal Plain, Alaska. We collected fish presence/non-detection data from 102 lakes and used a hierarchical multispecies occupancy framework to derive species richness and inform species composition patterns. Our mean estimate of regional richness was 12.3 (SD 0.5) species. Presence of a permanent channel connection was an overriding factor affecting species richness (mean 3.6, 95% CI 3.1-4.9), presumably driving lake colonisation potential. In lakes without a permanent channel connection, data suggest richness (mean 2.0, 95% CI 1.7-3.3) increased with the availability of in-lake winter refugia and with the potential of ephemeral connections during spring floods. Fish species functional traits and environmental faunal filters contributed to patterns of richness and assemblage composition. Composition corresponded with richness in a coherent manner, where each successive level of richness contained several discrete assemblages that showed similar responses to the environment. Lakes with permanent channel connections contained both widespread and restricted species, while the species-poor lakes that lacked a connection contained mainly widespread species. This work provides useful baseline information on the processes that drive the relations between patch connectivity and fish species richness and assemblage composition. The environmental processes that organise fish assemblages in Arctic lakes are likely to change in a warming climate.
RI Rosenberger, Amanda/R-9578-2018
OI Rosenberger, Amanda/0000-0002-5520-8349; Koch,
   Joshua/0000-0001-7180-6982; Zimmerman, Christian/0000-0002-3646-0688
TC 6
Z9 6
SN 0046-5070
EI 1365-2427
PD JUL
PY 2016
VL 61
IS 7
BP 1090
EP 1104
DI 10.1111/fwb.12769
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000377223300005
ER

PT J
AU Twardochleb, LA
   Olden, JD
AF Twardochleb, Laura A.
   Olden, Julian D.
TI Human development modifies the functional composition of lake littoral
   invertebrate communities
SO HYDROBIOLOGIA
DT Article
DE Functional diversity; Lake habitat; Life history traits; Littoral
   macroinvertebrates; Urban development
ID COARSE WOODY DEBRIS; SPECIES TRAITS; MACROINVERTEBRATE COMMUNITIES;
   RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT; STREAM INVERTEBRATES; AQUATIC COMMUNITIES;
   MULTIPLE STRESSORS; DIVERSITY INDEXES; WATER ECOSYSTEMS; TEMPERATE LAKES
AB Residential shoreline and watershed development by humans are leading agents of environmental change in lake ecosystems that reduce abundances and diversity of littoral invertebrates. Invertebrate functional and life history traits are robust indicators of environmental quality and ecosystem functioning, yet surprisingly few studies have utilized trait-based approaches to assess impacts of human development to lake littoral communities. We assessed environmental characteristics of human development that impact functional diversity and structure the trait composition of invertebrate communities in lakes of northwestern United States. Multiple linear regressions revealed that functional diversity declined with increasing watershed development, lake total phosphorus, and littoral macrophyte cover. Results from multivariate constrained ordination and fourth corner analysis indicated that high phosphorus concentrations and abundant macrophyte cover removed taxa with semivoltine life histories and filter feeders from lake communities, and that both regional ecosystem and local habitat characteristics of human development were important determinants of invertebrate community structure. Human development had particularly pronounced effects on invertebrate communities in the sublittoral zone, for which overall community abundances declined. Our study indicates that human development favors lake communities dominated by multivoltine taxa and herbivores, which may have important implications for energy flow among terrestrial, littoral, and pelagic food webs.
OI Twardochleb, Laura/0000-0002-8804-9399
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 0018-8158
EI 1573-5117
PD JUL
PY 2016
VL 775
IS 1
BP 167
EP 184
DI 10.1007/s10750-016-2727-5
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000376541800011
ER

PT J
AU Fernandez, R
   Moreno-Chacon, M
   Canessa, R
   Mardones, D
   Viveros, N
   Saldana, A
AF Fernandez, Rocio
   Moreno-Chacon, Maria
   Canessa, Rafaella
   Mardones, Daniela
   Viveros, Nataly
   Saldana, Alfredo
TI Relationship between ecological breadth of vascular epiphytes and their
   ecophysiological responses to light availability and moisture in the
   Sclerophyllous Mediterranean Coastal Forest of Chile
SO GAYANA BOTANICA
DT Article
DE Epiphytic microhabitat; leaf functional traits; ferns; environmental
   gradient
ID TEMPERATE RAIN-FOREST; CHLOROPHYLL METER; WATER RELATIONS; SOUTHERN
   CHILE; DIVERSITY; EVOLUTION; NITROGEN; GROWTH; PLANTS; PHOTOSYNTHESIS
AB Epiphytic microhabitat is exposed to microclimatic variations due to the local climate, forest structure and its dynamics. Consequently, the establishment, development and ecological breadth of epiphytes species depend on the ability to modify their physiology, morphology and phenology facing environmental restrictions. In this study the differences in ecological breadth of vascular epiphytes in relation with light availability and soil moisture are decribed in a relict stand of Mediterranean Coastal Sclerophyllous Forest located in Peninsula de Hualpen, Biobio Region (36 degrees 47'S y 73 degrees 10'S). We quantified the field distribution of each epiphyte species along these two gradients. We measured in situ variation in leaf relative water content (RWC), leaf chlorophyll content (Chl), and specific leaf mass (LMA). Seven vascular epiphytes species (two Angiosperms and five Pteridophytes) were found and some of them showed clear differences in their ecological breadth in both environmental gradients. Sarmienta scandens (Gesneriaceae), Asplenium trilobum (Aspleniaceae) and Pleopeltis macrocarpa (Polypodiaceae) were the most abundant species and they also showed higher ecological breadth both in the light and soil moisture gradients. For these species the change in Chl could be an important mechanism for acclimation under variation of the moisture conditions. Finally, although no relation between the ecological breadth in the light gradient and the leaf traits was found, our results suggest that the species composition is related to the light availability in the host trees.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0717-6643
PD JUN
PY 2016
VL 73
IS 1
BP 68
EP 76
DI 10.4067/S0717-66432016000100009
SC Plant Sciences
UT WOS:000383443500009
ER

PT J
AU Nieto, C
   Malizia, A
   Carilla, J
   Izquierdo, A
   Rodriguez, J
   Cuello, S
   Zannier, M
   Grau, HR
AF Nieto, Carolina
   Malizia, Agustina
   Carilla, Julieta
   Izquierdo, Andrea
   Rodriguez, Jose
   Cuello, Soledad
   Zannier, Martin
   Ricardo Grau, H.
TI Spatial patterns in communities of aquatic macroinvertebrates of
   Argentinean Puna
SO REVISTA DE BIOLOGIA TROPICAL
DT Article
DE macroinvertebrates; peatbogs; vegetation; aquatic ecosystems; puna;
   neotropical
ID HIGH-ALTITUDE STREAMS; SPECIES-RICHNESS; INVERTEBRATE ASSEMBLAGES;
   CHIRONOMIDAE DIPTERA; ELEVATIONAL GRADIENT; RIPARIAN VEGETATION;
   TEMPERATURE; INSECTS; ECOLOGY; OXYGEN
AB The macroinvertebrates are a vital component of freshwater ecosystems as they contribute to the process of organic matter while serving as food for other organisms such as fish and amphibians. Unfortunately, the knowledge of the aquatic diversity is poor in the high Andean systems (between 3 200 and 5 200 m.a.s.l. and rainfall below 300 mm per year), especially in the Argentinean peatbogs, a fact which has made difficult the interpretation of spatial patterns on a regional scale. The present study aimed to describe the composition of aquatic macroinvertebrates in seven peatbogs in the Argentinean Puna, and to analyze for the first time their spatial patterns. For this, we studied the relationship of these organisms with the environment, and obtained information about the surrounding vegetation and water physico-chemical characteristics. A total of 3 131 specimens of aquatic macroinvertebrates were collected, representing 25 taxa belonging to 22 families and 24 genera. In addition, 62 species of vascular plants were recorded, belonging to 20 families. The most abundant life form were the tufted grasses, followed by cushions. By using an NMDS (Non-Metrical Multidimensional Scaling) statistical analysis, the sampling sites were ordered in each peatbog as follows. The peatbogs located furthest West and South with higher water temperature were grouped on axis 1, whereas those with higher conductivity, whole water dissolved solids and salt concentration were grouped on axis 2. The water temperature was higher than air temperature at all times, and we found no association between temperature and altitude. The altitude had no correlation with the abundance of macroinvertebrates or with plant richness. Life forms such as scattered graminoids, trailing and prostrate herbs (in many cases they get into the channel) and aquatic plants were more abundant in peatbogs 4, 5 and 7 and they had a correlation with some macroinvertebrates belonging to functional trophic groups such as filter-collectors, collectors and scrapers. Finally, conductivity, whole dissolved solids and salt concentration had their highest value in peatbog 6, where Bivalvia (filter-collector) and Hyalella (collector) were also found. The results obtained attest that these macroinvertebrates displayed diversity and composition spatial patterns, the most important feature being their relationship with the surrounding vegetation, and to a lesser extent, with the physical and chemical traits of water in seven fertile lowlands in the Argentinean Puna.
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 0034-7744
EI 2215-2075
PD JUN
PY 2016
VL 64
IS 2
BP 747
EP 762
SC Life Sciences & Biomedicine - Other Topics
UT WOS:000383466800023
PM 29451767
ER

PT J
AU Nichols, J
   Hubbart, JA
   Poulton, BC
AF Nichols, John
   Hubbart, Jason A.
   Poulton, Barry C.
TI Using macroinvertebrate assemblages and multiple stressors to infer
   urban stream system condition: a case study in the central US
SO URBAN ECOSYSTEMS
DT Article
DE Macroinvertebrates; Physical habitat; Rootmats; Trait-based metrics;
   Urbanization; Hinkson Creek
ID LAND-USE; INVERTEBRATE TRAITS; ECOSYSTEMS; FLOW; CONSEQUENCES;
   DISTURBANCE; RESPONSES; INSECTS; HABITAT; WATER
AB Characterizing the impacts of hydrologic alterations, pollutants, and habitat degradation on macroinvertebrate species assemblages is of critical value for managers wishing to categorize stream ecosystem condition. A combination of approaches including trait-based metrics and traditional bioassessments provides greater information, particularly in anthropogenic stream ecosystems where traditional approaches can be confounded by variously interacting land use impacts. Macroinvertebrates were collected from two rural and three urban nested study sites in central Missouri, USA during the spring and fall seasons of 2011. Land use responses of conventional taxonomic and trait-based metrics were compared to streamflow indices, physical habitat metrics, and water quality indices. Results show that biotic index was significantly different (p < 0.05) between sites with differences detected in 54 % of trait-based metrics. The most consistent response to urbanization was observed in size metrics, with significantly (p < 0.05) fewer small bodied organisms. Increases in fine stream-bed sediment, decreased submerged woody rootmats, significantly higher winter Chloride concentrations, and decreased mean suspended sediment particle size in lower urban stream reaches also influenced macroinvertebrate assemblages. Riffle habitats in urban reaches contained 21 % more (p = 0.03) multivoltine organisms, which was positively correlated to the magnitude of peak flows (r(2) = 0.91, p = 0.012) suggesting that high flow events may serve as a disturbance in those areas. Results support the use of macroinvertebrate assemblages and multiple stressors to characterize urban stream system condition and highlight the need to better understand the complex interactions of trait-based metrics and anthropogenic aquatic ecosystem stressors.
TC 6
Z9 6
SN 1083-8155
EI 1573-1642
PD JUN
PY 2016
VL 19
IS 2
BP 679
EP 704
DI 10.1007/s11252-016-0534-4
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Urban
   Studies
UT WOS:000382671000011
ER

PT J
AU Huijbers, CM
   Schlacher, TA
   McVeigh, RR
   Schoeman, DS
   Olds, AD
   Brown, MB
   Ekanayake, KB
   Weston, MA
   Connolly, RM
AF Huijbers, Chantal M.
   Schlacher, Thomas A.
   McVeigh, Rosemary R.
   Schoeman, David S.
   Olds, Andrew D.
   Brown, Marion B.
   Ekanayake, Kasun B.
   Weston, Michael A.
   Connolly, Rod M.
TI Functional replacement across species pools of vertebrate scavengers
   separated at a continental scale maintains an ecosystem function
SO FUNCTIONAL ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE biogeography; carrion; foxes; macroecology; raptors; sandy beaches
ID FOXES VULPES-VULPES; CLIMATE-CHANGE; ARCTIC TUNDRA; BIODIVERSITY;
   MARINE; DIVERSITY; AUSTRALIA; MANAGEMENT; SUBSIDIES; RESOURCES
AB 1. The composition of species pools can vary in space and time. While many studies are focused on understanding which factors influence the make-up of species pools, the question to which degree biogeographic variation in species composition propagates to biogeographic variation in ecological function is rarely examined. If different local species assemblages operate in ways that maintain specific ecological processes across continents, they can be regarded as functionally equivalent. Alternatively, variation in species assemblages might result in the loss of ecological function if different species fulfil different functions, and thereby fail to maintain the ecological process.
   2. Here, we test whether ecological function is affected by differences in the composition of species pools across a continental scale, comparing a tropical with a temperate pool. The model systems are assemblages of vertebrates foraging on ocean beaches, and the ecological function of interest is the consumption of wave-cast carrion, a pivotal process in sandy shore ecosystems.
   3. We placed fish carcasses (n = 179) at the beach-dune interface, monitored by motion-triggered cameras to record scavengers and quantify the detection and removal of carrion. Scavenging function was measured on sandy beaches in two distinct biogeographic regions of Australia: tropical north Queensland and temperate Victoria.
   4. The composition of scavenging assemblages on sandy beaches varied significantly across the study domain. Raptors dominated in the tropics, while invasive red foxes were prominent in temperate assemblages. Notwithstanding the significant biogeographic change in species composition, ecological function - as indexed by carcass detection and removal - was maintained, suggesting strong functional replacement at the continental scale.
   5. Species pools of vertebrate scavengers that are assembled from taxonomically distinct groups (birds vs. mammals) and located in distinct climatic regions (temperate vs. tropical) can maintain an ecological process via replacement of species with comparable functional traits.
RI Huijbers, Chantal/J-5176-2014; Connolly, Rod/C-4094-2008
OI Huijbers, Chantal/0000-0001-5206-3415; Connolly,
   Rod/0000-0001-6223-1291; Olds, Andrew/0000-0002-8027-3599; Schlacher,
   Thomas/0000-0003-2184-9217; Schoeman, David/0000-0003-1258-0885
TC 12
Z9 12
SN 0269-8463
EI 1365-2435
PD JUN
PY 2016
VL 30
IS 6
BP 998
EP 1005
DI 10.1111/1365-2435.12577
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000379979800017
ER

PT J
AU Ramajo, L
   Marba, N
   Prado, L
   Peron, S
   Lardies, MA
   Rodriguez-Navarro, AB
   Vargas, CA
   Lagos, NA
   Duarte, CM
AF Ramajo, Laura
   Marba, Nuria
   Prado, Luis
   Peron, Sophie
   Lardies, Marco A.
   Rodriguez-Navarro, Alejandro B.
   Vargas, Cristian A.
   Lagos, Nelson A.
   Duarte, Carlos M.
TI Biomineralization changes with food supply confer juvenile scallops
   (Argopecten purpuratus) resistance to ocean acidification
SO GLOBAL CHANGE BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE food; natural variability; ocean acidification; periostracum; protein
   expression; resistance; tolerance
ID MUSSELS MYTILUS-GALLOPROVINCIALIS; HUMBOLDT CURRENT SYSTEM;
   PHYSIOLOGICAL ENERGETICS; SEAWATER ACIDIFICATION; CRASSOSTREA-GIGAS;
   METABOLIC DEPRESSION; CO2 CONCENTRATIONS; HIGH-CO2 WORLD; PACIFIC
   OYSTER; LARVAL SHELLS
AB Future ocean acidification (OA) will affect physiological traits of marine species, with calcifying species being particularly vulnerable. As OA entails high energy demands, particularly during the rapid juvenile growth phase, food supply may play a key role in the response of marine organisms to OA. We experimentally evaluated the role of food supply in modulating physiological responses and biomineralization processes in juveniles of the Chilean scallop, Argopecten purpuratus, that were exposed to control (pH similar to 8.0) and low pH (pH similar to 7.6) conditions using three food supply treatments (high, intermediate, and low). We found that pH and food levels had additive effects on the physiological response of the juvenile scallops. Metabolic rates, shell growth, net calcification, and ingestion rates increased significantly at low pH conditions, independent of food. These physiological responses increased significantly in organisms exposed to intermediate and high levels of food supply. Hence, food supply seems to play a major role modulating organismal response by providing the energetic means to bolster the physiological response of OA stress. On the contrary, the relative expression of chitin synthase, a functional molecule for biomineralization, increased significantly in scallops exposed to low food supply and low pH, which resulted in a thicker periostracum enriched with chitin polysaccharides. Under reduced food and low pH conditions, the adaptive organismal response was to trade-off growth for the expression of biomineralization molecules and altering of the organic composition of shell periostracum, suggesting that the future performance of these calcifiers will depend on the trajectories of both OA and food supply. Thus, incorporating a suite of traits and multiple stressors in future studies of the adaptive organismal response may provide key insights on OA impacts on marine calcifiers.
RI Marba, Nuria/H-8136-2015
OI Marba, Nuria/0000-0002-8048-6789; Lardies, Marco/0000-0003-3525-1830;
   Duarte, Carlos M./0000-0002-1213-1361
TC 14
Z9 14
SN 1354-1013
EI 1365-2486
PD JUN
PY 2016
VL 22
IS 6
BP 2025
EP 2037
DI 10.1111/gcb.13179
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000378721700004
PM 26644007
ER

PT J
AU Amundrud, SL
   Srivastava, DS
AF Amundrud, Sarah L.
   Srivastava, Diane S.
TI Trophic interactions determine the effects of drought on an aquatic
   ecosystem
SO ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE bottom-up; bromeliad; climate change; Costa Rica; detritivores;
   Mecistogaster modesta; precipitation; top-down; trophic cascade
ID FRESH-WATER ECOSYSTEMS; CLIMATE-CHANGE; SPECIES INTERACTIONS; COMMUNITY
   STRUCTURE; FOOD-WEB; PREDATION; IMPACTS; HABITAT; FACILITATION;
   ABUNDANCE
AB Species interactions can be important mediators of community and ecosystem responses to environmental stressors. However, we still lack a mechanistic understanding of the indirect ecological effects of stress that arise via altered species interactions. To understand how species interactions will be altered by environmental stressors, we need to know if the species that are vulnerable to such stressors also have large impacts on the ecosystem. As predators often exhibit certain traits that are linked to a high vulnerability to stress (e.g., large body size, long generation time), as well as having large effects on communities (e.g., top-down trophic effects), predators may be particularly likely to mediate ecological effects of environmental stress. Other functional groups, like facilitators, are known to have large impacts on communities, but their vulnerability to perturbations remains undocumented. Here, we use aquatic insect communities in bromeliads to examine the indirect effects of an important stressor (drought) on community and ecosystem responses. In a microcosm experiment, we manipulated predatory and facilitative taxa under a range of experimental droughts, and quantified effects on community structure and ecosystem function. Drought, by adversely affecting the top predator, had indirect cascading effects on the entire food web, altering community composition and decomposition. We identified the likely pathway of how drought cascaded through the food web from the top-down as drought -> predator -> shredder -> decomposition. This stress-induced cascade depended on predators exhibiting both a strong vulnerability to drought and large impacts on prey (especially shredders), as well as shredders exhibiting high functional importance as decomposers.
OI Amundrud, Sarah/0000-0002-0457-1551
TC 6
Z9 8
SN 0012-9658
EI 1939-9170
PD JUN
PY 2016
VL 97
IS 6
BP 1475
EP 1483
DI 10.1890/15-1638.1
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000377219900011
PM 27459778
ER

PT J
AU Preston, DL
   Mischler, JA
   Townsend, AR
   Johnson, PTJ
AF Preston, Daniel L.
   Mischler, John A.
   Townsend, Alan R.
   Johnson, Pieter T. J.
TI Disease Ecology Meets Ecosystem Science
SO ECOSYSTEMS
DT Article
DE parasite; pathogen; infection; host; ecosystem structure; ecosystem
   function; ecosystem dynamics; biogeochemistry; energy flow; stability
ID SUDDEN OAK DEATH; FOOD-WEB; FUNCTIONAL TRAITS; STAGE STRUCTURE; MARINE
   VIRUSES; PARASITES; COMMUNITIES; PATHOGENS; DIVERSITY; STREAM
AB Growing evidence indicates that parasites-when considered-can play influential roles in ecosystem structure and function, highlighting the need to integrate disease ecology and ecosystem science. To strengthen links between these traditionally disparate fields, we identified mechanisms through which parasites can affect ecosystems and used empirical literature searches to explore how commonly such mechanisms have been documented, the ecosystem properties affected, and the types of ecosystems in which they occur. Our results indicate that ecosystem-disease research has remained consistently rare, comprising less than 2% of disease ecology publications. Existing studies from terrestrial, freshwater, and marine systems, however, demonstrate that parasites can strongly affect (1) biogeochemical cycles of water, carbon, nutrients, and trace elements, (2) fluxes of biomass and energy, and (3) temporal ecosystem dynamics including disturbance, succession, and stability. Mechanistically, most studies have demonstrated density-mediated indirect effects, rather than trait-mediated effects, or direct effects of parasites, although whether this is representative remains unclear. Looking forward, we highlight the importance of applying traits-based approaches to predict when parasites are most likely to exert ecosystem-level effects. Future research should include efforts to extend host-parasite studies across levels of ecological organization, large-scale manipulations to experimentally quantify ecosystem roles of parasites, and the integration of parasites and disease into models of ecosystem functioning.
TC 17
Z9 17
SN 1432-9840
EI 1435-0629
PD JUN
PY 2016
VL 19
IS 4
BP 737
EP 748
DI 10.1007/s10021-016-9965-2
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000376283100013
ER

PT J
AU Reynolds, C
   Cumming, GS
AF Reynolds, Chevonne
   Cumming, Graeme S.
TI Defining functional groups using dietary data: Quantitative comparison
   suggests functional classification for seed-dispersing waterfowl
SO BASIC AND APPLIED ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE Functional group; Biodiversity Ecosystem services; Waterbirds; Aquatic
   plants; Seed dispersal; Cluster analysis; Distance-based redundancy
   analysis
ID AQUATIC ORGANISMS; SPECIES RICHNESS; DIVERSITY; SERVICES; WATERBIRDS;
   ECOLOGY; FRAMEWORK; RESPONSES; HABITAT; SPREAD
AB Recent years have seen considerable advances in ecological understanding of the functional role(s) of biodiversity and the connections between biodiversity, ecosystem function and ecosystem service provision Functional approaches have become important tools for simplifying biodiversity-ecosystem function relationships, but they also have some obvious weaknesses, In particular, since analyses that use functional groups treat members of a group as ecologically interchangeable, functional groups must be defined at a level that simplifies ecological complexity yet retains key ecological distinctions between groups of species. We developed a data-driven approach to functional group definition and applied it to a case study of 16 species of seed -dispersing Afrotropical waterfowl for which we created seed dispersal functional groups using both a priori categories, as typically done in previous studies, and a hierarchical clustering approach. Relevant functional differences and similarities occur among the waterfowl, particularly in the types of plant family dispersed. We found evidence for at least five functional groups of seed disperser. The different groupings have important implications for both wetland and terrestrial plant dispersal. Our analysis suggests that even for a relatively data-scarce study system, using a data-driven approach to generate functional groups offers a feasible and ecologically rigorous approach and is a useful alternative to simple a priori classification schemes. Our approach is capable of capturing variation across several functional traits and suggests that existing datasets may be useful in exploring variation in biodiversity ecosystem function relationships. Since functional classification schemes may affect our conclusions about biodiversity, ecosystem function and ecosystem service provision, considerable care should be given to ensuring that functional groups are not defined in such a way as to mask important ecological differences among supposedly similar species.
RI Cumming, Graeme/B-6551-2008
OI Cumming, Graeme/0000-0002-3678-1326; Reynolds,
   Chevonne/0000-0002-2345-7017
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 1439-1791
EI 1618-0089
PD JUN
PY 2016
VL 17
IS 4
BP 333
EP 343
DI 10.1016/j.baae.2015.12.006
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000375569900006
ER

PT J
AU Gambi, MC
   Musco, L
   Giangrande, A
   Badalamenti, F
   Micheli, F
   Kroeker, KJ
AF Gambi, M. C.
   Musco, L.
   Giangrande, A.
   Badalamenti, F.
   Micheli, F.
   Kroeker, K. J.
TI Distribution and functional traits of polychaetes in a CO2 vent system:
   winners and losers among closely related species
SO MARINE ECOLOGY PROGRESS SERIES
DT Article
DE Annelida; Algal cover; Ocean acidification; Hard bottoms; pH gradient;
   Covariation; Mediterranean Sea; Functional trait analysis
ID PLATYNEREIS-DUMERILII AUDOUIN; OCEAN ACIDIFICATION; SYLLIDAE ANNELIDA;
   POSIDONIA-OCEANICA; MARINE ORGANISMS; MILNE-EDWARDS; COMMUNITY; SEA;
   DIVERSITY; ECOLOGY
AB We report on fine taxonomic and functional analyses of polychaetes associated with rocky reefs along a gradient of ocean acidification (OA) at the volcanic CO2 vent system off the Castello Aragonese (Ischia Island, Italy). Percent cover of algae and sessile invertebrates (a determinant of polychaete distribution) was classified into functional groups to disentangle the direct effects of low pH on polychaete abundance from the indirect effects of pH on habitat and other species associations. A total of 6459 polychaete specimens belonging to 83 taxa were collected. Polychaete species richness and abundance dramatically dropped under the extreme low pH conditions due to the disappearance of both calcifying and non-calcifying species. Differences in distribution patterns indicate that the decreasing pH modified the structure and biological traits of polychaete assemblages independent of changes in habitat. A detailed taxonomic analysis highlighted species-specific responses to OA, with closely related species having opposing responses to decreasing pH. This resulted in an increase in the abundance of filter feeders and herbivores with decreasing pH, while sessile polychaetes disappeared in the extreme low pH zones, and were replaced by discretely motile forms. Reproductive traits of the polychaete assemblages changed as well, with brooding species dominating the most acidified zones. The few taxa that were abundant in extreme low pH conditions showed high tolerance to OA (e.g. Amphiglena mediterranea, Syllis prolifera, Platynereis cf. dumerilii, Parafabricia mazzellae, Brifacia aragonensis), and are promising models for further studies on the responses of benthic organisms to the effects of reduced pH.
OI Musco, Luigi/0000-0003-4750-4129; BADALAMENTI, FABIO/0000-0002-2395-454X
TC 16
Z9 16
SN 0171-8630
EI 1616-1599
PD MAY 25
PY 2016
VL 550
BP 121
EP 134
DI 10.3354/meps11727
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology;
   Oceanography
UT WOS:000379811700009
ER

PT J
AU Vasquez-Cardenas, D
   Quintana, CO
   Meysman, FJR
   Kristensen, E
   Boschker, HTS
AF Vasquez-Cardenas, Diana
   Quintana, Cintia Organo
   Meysman, Filip J. R.
   Kristensen, Erik
   Boschker, Henricus T. S.
TI Species-specific effects of two bioturbating polychaetes on sediment
   chemoautotrophic bacteria
SO MARINE ECOLOGY PROGRESS SERIES
DT Article
DE Dark carbon fixation; Fatty acids; Stable isotope probing; PLFA;
   Microbes; Nereis (Hediste) diversicolor; Marenzelleria viridis
ID COASTAL MARINE-SEDIMENTS; FATTY-ACID PROFILES; CAPITELLA SP-I;
   NEREIS-DIVERSICOLOR; MARENZELLERIA-VIRIDIS; COMMUNITY STRUCTURE;
   ARENICOLA-MARINA; BIOGEOCHEMICAL PROCESSES; MICROBIAL COMMUNITIES;
   BURROW VENTILATION
AB Bioturbation has major impacts on sediment biogeochemistry, which can be linked to the functional traits of the macrofauna involved. Nereis (Hediste) diversicolor and Marenzelleria viridis are 2 functionally different bioturbating polychaetes that strongly affect the ecology and biogeochemistry of coastal sediments. However, the different effects of these polychaetes on the activity and composition of microbial communities and on chemoautotrophic bacteria have not been extensively studied. We performed experiments with sediment aquaria that contained each species separately as well as a non-bioturbated control. Bacterial communities in different sediment zones (surface, burrow, subsurface) were characterized by phospholipid-derived fatty acid analysis combined with stable isotope labeling (C-13 bicarbonate) to quantify the dark CO2 fixation by chemoautotrophic bacteria. Pore water chemistry (Sigma H2S and dissolved inorganic carbon) was additionally assessed in each treatment. The strong ventilation but low bioirrigation capacity in the open-ended burrows of N. diversicolor resulted in enhanced aerobic chemoautotrophic activity, potentially by sulfur oxidizing and nitrifying bacteria along the burrow. In contrast, slower ventilation and higher irrigation by M. viridis induced an advective mode of pore water transport. This promotes anaerobic chemoautotrophy around the blind-ended burrow and within the subsurface sediment. Sulfate-reducing bacteria were the dominant anaerobic chemoautotrophs that probably disproportionate sulfur. In conclusion, our analysis shows that bioturbating fauna influence the microbial community and chemoautotrophic activity in sediments, but that the effect strongly depends on the structure of the burrow and on species-specific ventilation behavior and irrigation capacity.
RI Meysman, Filip/C-9585-2009
OI Meysman, Filip/0000-0001-5334-7655; Kristensen,
   Erik/0000-0001-7259-0132; Quintana, Cintia Organo/0000-0002-3022-6145
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 0171-8630
EI 1616-1599
PD MAY 10
PY 2016
VL 549
BP 55
EP 68
DI 10.3354/meps11679
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology;
   Oceanography
UT WOS:000376376200005
ER

PT J
AU Erickson, PA
   Ellis, NA
   Miller, CT
AF Erickson, Priscilla A.
   Ellis, Nicholas A.
   Miller, Craig T.
TI Microinjection for Transgenesis and Genome Editing in Threespine
   Sticklebacks
SO JOVE-JOURNAL OF VISUALIZED EXPERIMENTS
DT Article
DE Developmental Biology; Issue 111; stickleback; microinjection; TALEN;
   CRISPR; genome editing; Tol2; enhancer; Gasterosteus aculeatus
ID MEDIATED BAC TRANSGENESIS; EVOLVED TOOTH GAIN; GENE-EXPRESSION; ADAPTIVE
   EVOLUTION; PELVIC REDUCTION; ZEBRAFISH; MODEL; IDENTIFICATION; ENHANCER;
   ALLELES
AB The threespine stickleback fish has emerged as a powerful system to study the genetic basis of a wide variety of morphological, physiological, and behavioral phenotypes. The remarkably diverse phenotypes that have evolved as marine populations adapt to countless freshwater environments, combined with the ability to cross marine and freshwater forms, provide a rare vertebrate system in which genetics can be used to map genomic regions controlling evolved traits. Excellent genomic resources are now available, facilitating molecular genetic dissection of evolved changes. While mapping experiments generate lists of interesting candidate genes, functional genetic manipulations are required to test the roles of these genes. Gene regulation can be studied with transgenic reporter plasmids and BACs integrated into the genome using the Tol2 transposase system. Functions of specific candidate genes and cis-regulatory elements can be assessed by inducing targeted mutations with TALEN and CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing reagents. All methods require introducing nucleic acids into fertilized one-cell stickleback embryos, a task made challenging by the thick chorion of stickleback embryos and the relatively small and thin blastomere. Here, a detailed protocol for microinjection of nucleic acids into stickleback embryos is described for transgenic and genome editing applications to study gene expression and function, as well as techniques to assess the success of transgenesis and recover stable lines.
OI Erickson, Priscilla/0000-0001-8420-995X
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 1940-087X
PD MAY
PY 2016
IS 111
AR e54055
DI 10.3791/54055
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000380259900080
PM 27214565
ER

PT J
AU Rosado, BHP
   de Mattos, EA
AF Rosado, Bruno H. P.
   de Mattos, Eduardo A.
TI Chlorophyll fluorescence varies more across seasons than leaf water
   potential in drought-prone plants
SO ANAIS DA ACADEMIA BRASILEIRA DE CIENCIAS
DT Article
DE drought; functional traits; plant-water relations; photoinhibition;
   seasonal habitats
ID THERMAL-ENERGY DISSIPATION; TREE CLUSIA-HILARIANA; FUNCTIONAL TRAITS;
   FOREST TREES; SOIL TEXTURE; MECHANISMS; CAM; PHENOLOGY; RESPONSES;
   PHOTOSYNTHESIS
AB Among the effects of environmental change, the intensification of drought events is noteworthy, and tropical vegetation is predicted to be highly vulnerable to it. However, it is not clear how tropical plants in drought-prone habitats will respond to this change. In a coastal sandy plain environment, we evaluated the response of six plant species to water deficits across seasons, the relationship between their morphophysiological traits, and which traits would be the best descriptors of plants' response to drought. Regardless of leaf succulence and phenology, responses between seasons were most strongly related to chlorophyll fluorescence. In this study we have demonstrated that a better comprehension of how tropical species from drought-prone habitats cope with changes in water availability can be based on seasonal variation in leaf water potential and chlorophyll fluorescence. Temporal variation in leaf water potential and chlorophyll fluorescence was found useful for differentiating between groups of sandy soil species that are responsive or unresponsive to water availability. However, chlorophyll fluorescence appeared to be a more sensitive descriptor of their seasonal and short-term responses.
RI Rosado, Bruno/B-3534-2013
OI Rosado, Bruno/0000-0002-8924-8672
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0001-3765
EI 1678-2690
PD MAY
PY 2016
VL 88
IS 1
SU S
BP 549
EP 563
DI 10.1590/0001-3765201620150013
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000378102100011
PM 27142554
ER

PT J
AU Mueller, M
   Geist, J
AF Mueller, Melanie
   Geist, Juergen
TI Conceptual guidelines for the implementation of the ecosystem approach
   in biodiversity monitoring
SO ECOSPHERE
DT Article
DE biodiversity; ecosystem change; environment; impact assessment; multiple
   taxonomic groups; multivariate data integration; restoration
ID MULTIPLE TAXONOMIC GROUPS; LAND-USE; ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT; COMMUNITY
   RESPONSES; OCEAN ACIDIFICATION; SPECIES SURROGACY; FUNCTIONAL TRAITS;
   RICHNESS PATTERNS; FOOD WEBS; CONSERVATION
AB The theoretical concept of the ecosystem approach (EA) aims at assessing ecosystem function based on integrative assessments of multiple levels of biological organization. Since the United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity in 1992, the EA has been increasingly integrated into environmental policy and legislation, but to date, its practical implementation remains vague with a lack of universal guidelines and concrete recommendations for its use across ecosystem boundaries. On the basis of a review of scientific literature, worldwide environmental legislation and existing monitoring approaches, we identified the most important factors which hamper the feasibility of the EA. We propose a generally applicable methodology for implementing the EA in ecological and environmental monitoring across different ecosystems and habitat types. Successful application of the EA largely depends on adequately standardized and synchronized sampling designs for all abiotic and biotic components, appropriate depth of taxonomic identification, and sufficient spatial and temporal replication. The proposed step-by-step guidelines for using the EA are valid across ecosystem types, geographic regions, and for a variety of data types, making them promising tools for ecological monitoring.
RI Geist, Juergen/C-4933-2008
OI Geist, Juergen/0000-0001-7698-3443
TC 9
Z9 9
SN 2150-8925
PD MAY
PY 2016
VL 7
IS 5
AR e01305
DI 10.1002/ecs2.1305
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000377215200025
ER

PT J
AU Schriever, TA
   Lytle, DA
AF Schriever, Tiffany A.
   Lytle, David A.
TI Convergent diversity and trait composition in temporary streams and
   ponds
SO ECOSPHERE
DT Article
DE beta diversity; desert; functional traits; hydrology; invertebrates;
   resilience; resistance; vernal pools
ID FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; COMMUNITY STRUCTURE; SPECIES TRAITS; BETA
   DIVERSITY; BIOLOGICAL TRAITS; HABITAT TEMPLET; PATTERNS; BIODIVERSITY;
   RIVERS; ASSEMBLAGES
AB Hydrology is the main environmental filter in aquatic ecosystems and may result in shared tolerances and functional traits among species in disparate ecosystems. We analyzed the associations between taxonomic and functional facets of diversity within aquatic ecosystems (ponds vs. streams) across a hydroperiod gradient (1-365 d) to untangle the hydrologic drivers of aquatic invertebrate diversity. We used invertebrate assemblage data from seven arid-land streams in southeastern Arizona, United States collected over 2 yr and nine temperate woodland ponds in Ontario, Canada collected over 2 yr. Our results showed that although invertebrate assemblages from streams and ponds differ taxonomically, hydroperiod had similar influence on invertebrate trait structure regardless of biogeographic and habitat differences. Streams and ponds independently showed strong positive relationships between functional richness and taxonomic richness; however, the relationship showed a shallower slope in ponds, indicating higher functional redundancy. Intermittent ponds and streams tended to have lower functional and taxonomic richness than their perennial counterparts, but harbored greater beta diversity. Our results suggest that even though ponds and streams are fundamentally different habitats with distinct faunas and unique ecological processes, hydrology produces convergent patterns in both trait composition and diversity patterns.
TC 10
Z9 10
SN 2150-8925
PD MAY
PY 2016
VL 7
IS 5
AR e01350
DI 10.1002/ecs2.1350
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000377215200041
ER

PT J
AU Zhang, WP
   Tian, RM
   Bo, Y
   Cao, HL
   Cai, L
   Chen, LG
   Zhou, GW
   Sun, J
   Zhang, XX
   Al-Suwailem, A
   Qian, PY
AF Zhang, Weipeng
   Tian, Renmao
   Bo, Yang
   Cao, Huiluo
   Cai, Lin
   Chen, Lianguo
   Zhou, Guowei
   Sun, Jin
   Zhang, Xixiang
   Al-Suwailem, Abdulaziz
   Qian, Pei-Yuan
TI Environmental switching during biofilm development in a cold seep system
   and functional determinants of species sorting
SO MOLECULAR ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE biofilm; brine pool; Marinobacter; metagenome; Oleispira; species
   sorting
ID MICROBIAL COMMUNITIES; GENOMIC ANALYSIS; HIGH-THROUGHPUT; SEQUENCE;
   ADAPTATION; BACTERIUM; ALIGNMENT; DYNAMICS; SPONGE; GENES
AB The functional basis for species sorting theory remains elusive, especially for microbial community assembly in deep-sea environments. Using artificial surface-based biofilm models, our recent work revealed taxonomic succession during biofilm development in a newly defined cold seep system, the Thuwal cold seeps II, which comprises a brine pool and the adjacent normal bottom water (NBW) to form a meta-community via the potential immigration of organisms from one patch to another. Here, we designed an experiment to investigate the effects of environmental switching between the brine pool and the NBW on biofilm assembly, which could reflect environmental filtering effects during bacterial immigration to new environments. Analyses of 16S rRNA genes of 71 biofilm samples suggested that the microbial composition of biofilms established in new environments was determined by both the source community and the incubation conditions. Moreover, a comparison of 18 metagenomes provided evidence for biofilm community assembly that was based primarily on functional features rather than taxonomic identities; metal ion resistance and amino acid metabolism were the major species sorting determinants for the succession of biofilm communities. Genome binning and pathway reconstruction of two bacterial species (Marinobacter sp. and Oleispira sp.) further demonstrated metal ion resistance and amino acid metabolism as functional traits conferring the survival of habitat generalists in both the brine pool and NBW. The results of this study shed new light on microbial community assembly in special habitats and bridge a gap in species sorting theory.
RI Cai, Lin/K-2105-2013; Sun, Jin/C-1458-2010
OI Sun, Jin/0000-0001-8002-6881; Tian, Renmao/0000-0003-2151-4417
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 0962-1083
EI 1365-294X
PD MAY
PY 2016
VL 25
IS 9
BP 1958
EP 1971
DI 10.1111/mec.13501
SC Biochemistry & Molecular Biology; Environmental Sciences & Ecology;
   Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000377023400006
PM 26614914
ER

PT J
AU Hartwig, M
   Schaffer, M
   Theuring, P
   Avlyush, S
   Rode, M
   Borchardt, D
AF Hartwig, M.
   Schaeffer, M.
   Theuring, P.
   Avlyush, S.
   Rode, M.
   Borchardt, D.
TI Cause-effect-response chains linking source identification of eroded
   sediments, loss of aquatic ecosystem integrity and management options in
   a steppe river catchment (Kharaa, Mongolia)
SO ENVIRONMENTAL EARTH SCIENCES
DT Article
DE DPSIR; Land-use change; Erosion; Ecosystem integrity; Management
ID EXTREME CONTINENTAL CLIMATE; WATER-RESOURCES MANAGEMENT; NORTHERN
   MONGOLIA; BENTHIC INVERTEBRATES; SUSPENDED SEDIMENT; HYPORHEIC ZONE;
   FINE-SEDIMENT; CENTRAL-ASIA; BASIN; NUTRIENT
AB Although sparsely populated, the progressive degradation of Mongolia's rivers, lakes and groundwater, driven by land-use changes, poses a key challenge for the future sustainable development of the country. This paper deciphers the cause-effect-response chain between river bank degradation, changes of the ecological status, declines of ecosystem functions and priority measures with the case of the Kharaa River in Northern Mongolia. The underlying research approach comprised: (1) hydromorphological characterisation of the Kharaa River, (2) water quality assessments, (3) determination of the riverbed composition including hyporheic zone properties, (4) the analysis of riverine biota (macroinvertebrates and primary producers) and (5) the identification of the sources of suspended and settled sediments. The assessment revealed a gradient of spatially heterogeneous river bank erosion due to the degradation of the riparian vegetation caused by over-grazing and wood utilization. As the most prominent ecological response, the biomass of benthic algae decreased and macrozoobenthic community metrics changed continuously along the pressure gradient, accompanied by shifts of habitat related functional traits. At the same time, the hyporheic zone dimensions and functioning were affected by suspended and infiltrated sediments in multiple ways (restricted spatial extent, lowered hydraulic connectivity, lower metabolism, ecologically critical quality of pore water). Geochemical and radionuclide fallout isotope fingerprinting has identified riverbank erosion as the main source of the suspended sediments in the Kharaa River, when compared to gully and land surface erosion. Erosion susceptibility calculations in combination with suspended sediment observations showed a strong seasonal and annual variability of sediment input and instream transport, and a strong connection of erosional behaviour with land-use. Amongst others, the protection of headwaters and the stabilization of the river bank erosion hotspots in the midstream sections of the Kharaa River are the priority measures to avoid further degradation of the aquatic ecosystem status and functions.
RI Borchardt, Dietrich/D-1729-2009
OI Borchardt, Dietrich/0000-0002-6074-2829
TC 5
Z9 5
SN 1866-6280
EI 1866-6299
PD MAY
PY 2016
VL 75
IS 10
AR 855
DI 10.1007/s12665-015-5092-1
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Geology; Water Resources
UT WOS:000376589500008
ER

PT J
AU Saito, VS
   Cianciaruso, MV
   Siqueira, T
   Fonseca-Gessner, AA
   Pavoine, S
AF Saito, Victor S.
   Cianciaruso, Marcus Vinicius
   Siqueira, Tadeu
   Fonseca-Gessner, Alaide A.
   Pavoine, Sandrine
TI Phylogenies and traits provide distinct insights about the historical
   and contemporary assembly of aquatic insect communities
SO ECOLOGY AND EVOLUTION
DT Article
DE Assembly rules; community assembly; ecophylogenetics; habitat filtering;
   niche complementarity; trait structure
ID TROPICAL TREE COMMUNITIES; FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; NULL MODELS;
   COMPETITIVE-EXCLUSION; NICHE CONSERVATISM; ATLANTIC FOREST; TRICHOPTERA;
   SIMILARITY; PATTERNS; ECOLOGY
AB The assumption that traits and phylogenies can be used as proxies of species niche has faced criticisms. Evidence suggested that phylogenic relatedness is a weak proxy of trait similarity. Moreover, different processes can select different traits, giving opposing signals in null model analyses. To circumvent these criticisms, we separated traits of stream insects based on the concept of alpha and beta niches, which should give clues about assembling pressures expected to act independently of each other. We investigated the congruence between the phylogenetic structure and trait structure of communities using all available traits and all possible combinations of traits (4095 combinations). To account for hierarchical assembling processes, we analyzed patterns on two spatial scales with three pools of genera. Beta niche traits selected a priori - i.e., traits related to environmental variation (e.g., respiration type) - were consistently clustered on the smaller scale, suggesting environmental filtering, while a niche traits i. e., traits related to resource use (e.g., trophic position) - did not display the expected overdispersion, suggesting a weak role of competition. Using all traits together provided random patterns and the analysis of all possible combinations of traits provided scenarios ranging from strong clustering to overdispersion. Communities were phylogenetically overdispersed, a pattern previously interpreted as phylogenetic limiting similarity. However, our results likely reflect the co-occurrence of ancient clades due to the stability of stream habitats along the evolutionary scale. We advise ecologists to avoid using combinations of all available traits but rather carefully traits based on the objective under consideration. Both trait and phylogenetic approaches should be kept in the ecologist toolbox, but phylogenetic distances should not be used as proxies of traits differences. Although the phylogenetic structure revealed processes operating at the evolutionary scale, only specific traits explained local processes operating in our communities.
RI Siqueira, Tadeu/A-6978-2009; Cianciaruso, Marcus/B-9509-2012
OI Siqueira, Tadeu/0000-0001-5069-2904; Cianciaruso,
   Marcus/0000-0001-5866-5345; Saito, Victor/0000-0001-6112-7249
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 2045-7758
PD MAY
PY 2016
VL 6
IS 9
BP 2925
EP 2937
DI 10.1002/ece3.2081
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000376149400024
PM 27217945
ER

PT J
AU Finkel, OM
   Delmont, TO
   Post, AF
   Belkin, S
AF Finkel, Omri M.
   Delmont, Tom O.
   Post, Anton F.
   Belkin, Shimshon
TI Metagenomic Signatures of Bacterial Adaptation to Life in the
   Phyllosphere of a Salt-Secreting Desert Tree
SO APPLIED AND ENVIRONMENTAL MICROBIOLOGY
DT Article
ID MICROBIAL COMMUNITIES; BACILLUS-MEGATERIUM; GENOME SEQUENCE;
   HIGH-THROUGHPUT; LEAF SURFACES; DIVERSITY; INSIGHTS; VISUALIZATION;
   RHODOPSINS; ALIGNMENT
AB The leaves of Tamarix aphylla, a globally distributed, salt-secreting desert tree, are dotted with alkaline droplets of high salinity. To successfully inhabit these organic carbon-rich droplets, bacteria need to be adapted to multiple stress factors, including high salinity, high alkalinity, high UV radiation, and periodic desiccation. To identify genes that are important for survival in this harsh habitat, microbial community DNA was extracted from the leaf surfaces of 10 Tamarix aphylla trees along a 350-km longitudinal gradient. Shotgun metagenomic sequencing, contig assembly, and binning yielded 17 genome bins, six of which were >80% complete. These genomic bins, representing three phyla (Proteobacteria, Bacteroidetes, and Firmicutes), were closely related to halophilic and alkaliphilic taxa isolated from aquatic and soil environments. Comparison of these genomic bins to the genomes of their closest relatives revealed functional traits characteristic of bacterial populations inhabiting the Tamarix phyllosphere, independent of their taxonomic affiliation. These functions, most notably light-sensing genes, are postulated to represent important adaptations toward colonization of this habitat.
   IMPORTANCE
   Plant leaves are an extensive and diverse microbial habitat, forming the main interface between solar energy and the terrestrial biosphere. There are hundreds of thousands of plant species in the world, exhibiting a wide range of morphologies, leaf surface chemistries, and ecological ranges. In order to understand the core adaptations of microorganisms to this habitat, it is important to diversify the type of leaves that are studied. This study provides an analysis of the genomic content of the most abundant bacterial inhabitants of the globally distributed, salt-secreting desert tree Tamarix aphylla. Draft genomes of these bacteria were assembled, using the culture-independent technique of assembly and binning of metagenomic data. Analysis of the genomes reveals traits that are important for survival in this habitat, most notably, light-sensing and light utilization genes.
RI Delmont, Tom/A-4331-2018
OI Delmont, Tom/0000-0001-7053-7848; Belkin, Shimshon/0000-0001-8283-1673
TC 4
Z9 5
SN 0099-2240
EI 1098-5336
PD MAY
PY 2016
VL 82
IS 9
BP 2854
EP 2861
DI 10.1128/AEM.00483-16
SC Biotechnology & Applied Microbiology; Microbiology
UT WOS:000374640400028
PM 26944845
ER

PT J
AU Okamoto, DK
AF Okamoto, Daniel K.
TI Competition among Eggs Shifts to Cooperation along a Sperm Supply
   Gradient in an External Fertilizer
SO AMERICAN NATURALIST
DT Article
DE sexual conflict; fitness; marine invertebrates; fertilization dynamics;
   sperm competition; trade-offs
ID SPAWNING MARINE-INVERTEBRATES; URCHIN STRONGYLOCENTROTUS-FRANCISCANUS;
   CONGENERIC SEA-URCHINS; SEXUAL CONFLICT; BROADCAST-SPAWNERS; KINETICS
   MODELS; GAMETE TRAITS; FLUID SHEAR; CONSEQUENCES; CHEMOTAXIS
AB Competition among gametes for fertilization imposes strong selection. For external fertilizers, this selective pressure extends to eggs for which spawning conditions can range from sperm limitation (competition among eggs) to sexual conflict (overabundance of competing sperm toxic to eggs). Yet existing fertilization models ignore dynamics that can alter the functional nature of gamete interactions. These factors include attraction of sperm to eggs, egg crowding effects, or other nonlinearities in per capita rates of sperm-egg interaction. Such processes potentially allow egg concentrations to drastically affect viable fertilization probabilities. I experimentally tested whether such egg effects occur, using the urchin Strongylocentrotus purpuratus, and parameterized a newly derived model of fertilization dynamics and existing models modified to include such interactions. The experiments revealed that at low sperm concentrations, eggs compete for sperm, while at high sperm concentrations, eggs cooperatively reduce abnormal fertilization (a proxy for polyspermy). I show that these observations are consistent with declines in the per capita rate at which sperm and eggs interact as eggs increase in density. The results suggest a fitness trade-off of egg release during spawning: as sperm range from scarce to superabundant, interactions among eggs transition from highly competitive to cooperative in terms of viable fertilization probabilities.
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 0003-0147
EI 1537-5323
PD MAY
PY 2016
VL 187
IS 5
BP E129
EP E142
DI 10.1086/685813
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000374839900002
PM 27105001
ER

PT J
AU Morton, B
   Machado, FM
   Passos, FD
AF Morton, Brian
   Machado, Fabrizio Marcondes
   Passos, Flavio Dias
TI The smallest carnivorous bivalve? Biology, morphology and behaviour of
   Grippina coronata (Anomalodesmata: Cuspidarioidea: Spheniopsidae)
   preying on epipsammic microcrustaceans in the southwestern Atlantic off
   Brazil
SO JOURNAL OF MOLLUSCAN STUDIES
DT Article
ID FUNCTIONAL-MORPHOLOGY; DEEP-SEA; EVOLUTIONARY HISTORY; CAMPOS BASIN;
   MOLLUSCA; CAPTURE; VERTICORDIIDAE; LYONSIELLIDAE; PELECYPODA; PANDORACEA
AB The Spheniopsidae are today represented by five living species of Spheniopsis and nine of Grippina, distributed in the Pacific and Atlantic Oceans. Little is known of their anatomy and the phylogenetic position of the family within the Bivalvia is debated. In order to investigate these questions, the functional morphology of Grippina coronata obtained from the continental shelf off Rio de Janeiro and Espirito Santo States, Brazil, has been examined. Less than 2 mm in shell length, the siphonal apparatus of G. coronata is complex, with seven sensory papillae, and the ctenidia are reduced to transverse septa pierced by four pairs of ciliated pores. There are no labial palps and the stomach is of Type II with epibenthic harpacticoid and ostracod prey identified inside it. Although there is an intestine producing faeces, the stomach also possesses a unique waste storage pouch for exoskeletal remains of digested prey. Collectively, these features suggest that the Spheniopsidae comprise carnivorous taxa belonging to the Cuspidarioidea within the Anomalodesmata. Grippina coronata is a self-fertilizing simultaneous hermaphrodite that, uniquely, broods fertilized oocytes within the ovarian follicles and, thereby, provides the first example of intrafollicular fertilization and brooding in the Bivalvia. Release of the encapsulated oocytes must be by parental death, which coincidentally releases the exoskeletal remains from the storage pouch. Such post mortem semelparity creates a life-history trait hitherto unrecognized in the Bivalvia.
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 0260-1230
EI 1464-3766
PD MAY
PY 2016
VL 82
BP 244
EP 258
DI 10.1093/mollus/eyv055
PN 2
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Zoology
UT WOS:000374963300003
ER

PT J
AU Bayer, B
   Vojvoda, J
   Offre, P
   Alves, RJE
   Elisabeth, NH
   Garcia, JAL
   Volland, JM
   Srivastava, A
   Schleper, C
   Herndl, GJ
AF Bayer, Barbara
   Vojvoda, Jana
   Offre, Pierre
   Alves, Ricardo J. E.
   Elisabeth, Nathalie H.
   Garcia, Juan A. L.
   Volland, Jean-Marie
   Srivastava, Abhishek
   Schleper, Christa
   Herndl, Gerhard J.
TI Physiological and genomic characterization of two novel marine
   thaumarchaeal strains indicates niche differentiation
SO ISME JOURNAL
DT Article
ID AMMONIA-OXIDIZING ARCHAEON; HYDROGENOBACTER-THERMOPHILUS TK-6; CITRATE
   CLEAVAGE REACTION; NORTHERN ADRIATIC SEA; 16S RIBOSOMAL-RNA;
   NITROSOSPHAERA-VIENNENSIS; NITRITE REDUCTASE; MESOPHILIC CRENARCHAEOTA;
   AMORPHOUS AGGREGATIONS; METHANE MONOOXYGENASE
AB Ammonia-oxidizing Archaea (AOA) are ubiquitous throughout the oceanic water column; however, our knowledge on their physiological and ecological diversity in different oceanic regions is rather limited. Here, we report the cultivation and characterization of two novel Nitrosopumilus strains, originating from coastal surface waters of the Northern Adriatic Sea. The combined physiological and genomic information revealed that each strain exhibits different metabolic and functional traits, potentially reflecting contrasting life modes. Strain NF5 contains many chemotaxis-related genes and is able to express archaella, suggesting that it can sense and actively seek favorable microenvironments such as nutrient-rich particles. In contrast, strain D3C is non-motile and shows higher versatility in substrate utilization, being able to use urea as an alternative substrate in addition to ammonia. Furthermore, it encodes a divergent, second copy of the AmoB subunit of the key enzyme ammonia monooxygenase, which might have an additional catalytic function and suggests further metabolic versatility. However, the role of this gene requires further investigation. Our results provide evidence for functional diversity and metabolic versatility among phylogenetically closely related thaumarchaeal strains, and point toward adaptations to free-living versus particle-associated life styles and possible niche differentiation among AOA in marine ecosystems.
RI Eloy Alves, Ricardo Jorge/C-2530-2013
OI Eloy Alves, Ricardo Jorge/0000-0002-7567-3205; Herndl, Gerhard
   J./0000-0002-2223-2852; Bayer, Barbara/0000-0003-3968-5804; Garcia, Juan
   Antonio/0000-0003-4564-7281; Elisabeth, nathalie H/0000-0002-1657-0046;
   Volland, Jean-Marie/0000-0002-8716-2728
TC 34
Z9 34
SN 1751-7362
EI 1751-7370
PD MAY
PY 2016
VL 10
IS 5
BP 1051
EP 1063
DI 10.1038/ismej.2015.200
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Microbiology
UT WOS:000374377200004
PM 26528837
ER

PT J
AU Uhl, B
   Wolfling, M
   Fiala, B
   Fiedler, K
AF Uhl, Britta
   Woelfling, Mirko
   Fiala, Brigitte
   Fiedler, Konrad
TI Micro-moth communities mirror environmental stress gradients within a
   Mediterranean nature reserve
SO BASIC AND APPLIED ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE Insect biodiversity; Functional diversity; Species composition;
   Anthropogenic impact; Coastal forest; Environmental gradients;
   Conservation management
ID FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; SPECIES-DIVERSITY; HABITAT QUALITY; LEPIDOPTERA;
   RAVENNA; PATTERNS; BIODIVERSITY; LANDSCAPE; RESPONSES; RICHNESS
AB Isolated conservation areas embedded in a hemerobic landscape matrix run the risk of losing their functionality through stress impacts from their surroundings. We studied insects in one of the last remaining coastal forest reserves in northern Italy, viz. the Pineta san Vitale near Ravenna, to assess whether local assemblages are shaped by gradients of external environmental stressors. Specifically, we asked whether proximity to the nearest sources of aerially transported pollutants and extent of soil salinity affect communities. We used nocturnal micro-moths as target group since their usually high degree of host-plant specificity and often small body size lead us to expect these insects to reveal community differentiation at very small spatial scales within the reserve. We sampled 6085 moths representing 157 species at 16 light-trap sites during the vegetation period in 2013. We then assembled a matrix of 37 traits relating to larval niche, body size, phenology, migration behavior and habitat preferences from literature sources. With these data we established that species composition and overall functional diversity of local micro-moth assemblages was strongly influenced by the distance to pollution sources, and less so by soil salinity. In contrast, species richness and species diversity were not effective in depicting influences of these two enviromental gradients. Our results show that micro-moth communities respond sensitively to environmental conditions on small spatial scales, yet not all community attributes are equally suitable to uncover such relationships. Species composition and functional diversity emerged as far more informative than measures of local species diversity.
RI Fiala, Brigitte/I-3788-2016
OI Fiedler, Konrad/0000-0002-4789-3753; Fiala, Brigitte/0000-0002-9625-1933
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1439-1791
EI 1618-0089
PD MAY
PY 2016
VL 17
IS 3
BP 273
EP 281
DI 10.1016/j.baae.2015.10.002
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000373378300009
ER

PT J
AU Xu, GJ
   Xu, HL
AF Xu, Guangjian
   Xu, Henglong
TI Use of body-size distinctness of biofilm-dwelling protozoa for marine
   bioassessment
SO ECOLOGICAL INDICATORS
DT Article
DE Functional distinctness; Body-size spectrum; Biofilm-dwelling protozoa;
   Water quality; Bioassessment; Marine ecosystems
ID ENVIRONMENTAL-QUALITY STATUS; ENUMERATION TIME PERIODS; CILIATE
   COMMUNITIES; COASTAL WATERS; TAXONOMIC DISTINCTNESS; SPECIES POOL;
   ARTIFICIAL SUBSTRATUM; COLONIZATION SURVEYS; NORTHERN CHINA; JIAOZHOU
   BAY
AB As an inherent function of a community, body-size spectrum has proved to be a robust indicator for functional community research and global bioassessment. To determine the feasibility of body-size distinctness of biofilm-dwelling protozoa for marine bioassessment, a set of data points of the protozoa, which was monthly collected at four stations within a gradient of pollution in coastal waters of the Yellow Sea, northern China during a 1-year cycle, was studied. The body-size spectra of the protozoa showed a clear spatial pattern in response to the water quality status among four sampling stations. The average body-size distinctness (Delta(+)(z)) and variation in body-size distinctness (Delta(+)(z)) were used to evaluate the water quality status based on a Euclidean distance resemblance and a modified hierarchy of body-size units, respectively. The paired distinctness measures (Delta(+)(z) and Delta(+)(z)) based on both traits showed a significant departure from the expected trait hierarchy of body-size spectrum. These results suggest that the body size distinctness measures may be a useful indicator for discrimination of water quality status in marine ecosystems, using biofilm-dwelling protozoa. (C) 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
TC 7
Z9 7
SN 1470-160X
EI 1872-7034
PD MAY
PY 2016
VL 64
BP 152
EP 157
DI 10.1016/j.ecolind.2015.12.040
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000371098700015
ER

PT J
AU Ballarin, C
   Povinelli, M
   Granato, A
   Panin, M
   Corain, L
   Peruffo, A
   Cozzi, B
AF Ballarin, Cristina
   Povinelli, Michele
   Granato, Alberto
   Panin, Mattia
   Corain, Livio
   Peruffo, Antonella
   Cozzi, Bruno
TI The Brain of the Domestic Bos taurus: Weight, Encephalization and
   Cerebellar Quotients, and Comparison with Other Domestic and Wild
   Cetartiodactyla
SO PLOS ONE
DT Article
ID MAMMALIAN NEOCORTEX; CETACEAN BRAIN; FRONTAL-CORTEX; EVOLUTION;
   EXPRESSION; SIZE; NEUROANATOMY; ALPHA; MODEL; BETA
AB The domestic bovine Bos taurus is raised worldwide for meat and milk production, or even for field work. However the functional anatomy of its central nervous system has received limited attention and most of the reported data in textbooks and reviews are derived from single specimens or relatively old literature. Here we report information on the brain of Bos taurus obtained by sampling 158 individuals, 150 of which at local abattoirs and 8 in the dissecting room, these latter subsequently formalin-fixed. Using body weight and fresh brain weight we calculated the Encephalization Quotient (EQ), and Cerebellar Quotient (CQ). Formalin-fixed brains sampled in the necropsy room were used to calculate the absolute and relative weight of the major components of the brain. The data that we obtained indicate that the domestic bovine Bos taurus possesses a large, convoluted brain, with a slightly lower weight than expected for an animal of its mass. Comparisons with other terrestrial and marine members of the order Cetartiodactyla suggested close similarity with other species with the same feeding adaptations, and with representative baleen whales. On the other hand differences with fish-hunting toothed whales suggest separate evolutionary pathways in brain evolution. Comparison with the other large domestic herbivore Equus caballus (belonging to the order Perissodactyla) indicates that Bos taurus underwent heavier selection of bodily traits, which is also possibly reflected in a comparatively lower EQ than in the horse. The data analyzed suggest that the brain of domestic bovine is potentially interesting for comparative neuroscience studies and may represents an alternative model to investigate neurodegeneration processes.
RI Corain, Livio/T-2417-2017
OI GRANATO, Alberto/0000-0003-3755-1036; Peruffo,
   Antonella/0000-0003-0454-9087
TC 5
Z9 5
SN 1932-6203
PD APR 29
PY 2016
VL 11
IS 4
AR e0154580
DI 10.1371/journal.pone.0154580
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000375212600042
PM 27128674
ER

PT J
AU Greenfield, BL
   Kraan, C
   Pilditch, CA
   Thrush, SF
AF Greenfield, Barry L.
   Kraan, Casper
   Pilditch, Conrad A.
   Thrush, Simon F.
TI Mapping functional groups can provide insight into ecosystem functioning
   and potential resilience of intertidal sandflats
SO MARINE ECOLOGY PROGRESS SERIES
DT Article
DE Biodiversity; Ecosystem function; Functional redundancy; Functional
   traits; Intertidal; New Zealand; Scale-dependence; Spatial
   autocorrelation; Spatial variation
ID SPECIES ABUNDANCE DISTRIBUTIONS; INTERACTION NETWORKS; MARINE
   BIODIVERSITY; LANDSCAPE-SCALE; DIVERSITY; REDUNDANCY; CONSEQUENCES;
   WORLD; SEA; CONSERVATION
AB The ability of species to maintain ecosystem functions under environmental stress depends on their vulnerability, adaptability and potential for dispersal and re-establishment. Species that share traits can perform similar functions, thus offering functional redundancy, and therefore potentially confer resilience in ecosystem function. In this regard, both species abundance and occurrence across a landscape are likely to affect the importance of redundancy. To investigate spatial patterns in functional redundancy, we assessed the degree to which specific functional traits linked to ecosystem function are shared, along with patterns of abundance and distribution, in a macrobenthic community (115 taxa; 23 682 individuals) sampled in 400 plots from a large intertidal area (300 000 m(2)). We defined 26 functional groups; 85% of these contained more than 1 species and 50% more than 3 species. Most functional group (22 of 26) distributions were non-random (as identified by Moran's I) and fell into 1 of 3 spatial patterns-gradients (n = 8 function groups), and large (n = 2) and small patches (n = 12)-that separate the functional attributes of the macrobenthic community. Only 2 functional groups exhibited low species richness and low abundance, but their widespread occurrence could provide resilience to small-scale disturbances. This spatial consideration of functional group distribution stresses the notion that resilience is likely to be scale-dependent rather than a commodity on offer across a whole system. Our findings emphasise the importance not only of within-functional group species richness but also of abundance and occurrence as a framework to investigate functional diversity and resilience of benthic seafloor communities.
OI Thrush, Simon/0000-0002-4005-3882; Kraan, Casper/0000-0003-2062-6222
TC 7
Z9 7
SN 0171-8630
EI 1616-1599
PD APR 21
PY 2016
VL 548
BP 1
EP 10
DI 10.3354/meps11692
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology;
   Oceanography
UT WOS:000376375000001
ER

PT J
AU Dong, XY
   Li, B
   He, FZ
   Gu, Y
   Sun, MQ
   Zhang, HM
   Tan, L
   Xiao, W
   Liu, SR
   Cai, QH
AF Dong, Xiaoyu
   Li, Bin
   He, Fengzhi
   Gu, Yuan
   Sun, Meiqin
   Zhang, Haomiao
   Tan, Lu
   Xiao, Wen
   Liu, Shuoran
   Cai, Qinghua
TI Flow directionality, mountain barriers and functional traits determine
   diatom metacommunity structuring of high mountain streams
SO SCIENTIFIC REPORTS
DT Article
ID POPULATION GENETIC-STRUCTURE; DISPERSAL LIMITATION; ENVIRONMENTAL
   HETEROGENEITY; LIMITED DISPERSAL; AQUATIC INSECTS; BENTHIC DIATOMS;
   SPATIAL SCALES; BETA DIVERSITY; COMMUNITY; ECOLOGY
AB Stream metacommunities are structured by a combination of local (environmental filtering) and regional (dispersal) processes. The unique characters of high mountain streams could potentially determine metacommunity structuring, which is currently poorly understood. Aiming at understanding how these characters influenced metacommunity structuring, we explored the relative importance of local environmental conditions and various dispersal processes, including through geographical (overland), topographical (across mountain barriers) and network (along flow direction) pathways in shaping benthic diatom communities. From a trait perspective, diatoms were categorized into high-profile, low-profile and motile guild to examine the roles of functional traits. Our results indicated that both environmental filtering and dispersal processes influenced metacommunity structuring, with dispersal contributing more than environmental processes. Among the three pathways, stream corridors were primary pathway. Deconstructive analysis suggested different responses to environmental and spatial factors for each of three ecological guilds. However, regardless of traits, dispersal among streams was limited by mountain barriers, while dispersal along stream was promoted by rushing flow in high mountain stream. Our results highlighted that directional processes had prevailing effects on metacommunity structuring in high mountain streams. Flow directionality, mountain barriers and ecological guilds contributed to a better understanding of the roles that mountains played in structuring metacommunity.
OI cai, qing hua/0000-0002-0224-7256
TC 12
Z9 12
SN 2045-2322
PD APR 19
PY 2016
VL 6
AR 24711
DI 10.1038/srep24711
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000374492000001
PM 27090223
ER

PT J
AU Nam, BH
   Jung, M
   Subramaniyam, S
   Yoo, SI
   Markkandan, K
   Moon, JY
   Kim, YO
   Kim, DG
   An, CM
   Shin, Y
   Jung, HJ
   Park, JH
AF Nam, Bo-Hye
   Jung, Myunghee
   Subramaniyam, Sathiyamoorthy
   Yoo, Seung-il
   Markkandan, Kesavan
   Moon, Ji-Young
   Kim, Young-Ok
   Kim, Dong-Gyun
   An, Cheul Min
   Shin, Younhee
   Jung, Ho-jin
   Park, Jun-hyung
TI Transcriptome Analysis Revealed Changes of Multiple Genes Involved in
   Haliotis discus hannai Innate Immunity during Vibrio parahemolyticus
   Infection
SO PLOS ONE
DT Article
ID RNA-SEQ DATA; DISK ABALONE; MOLECULAR CHARACTERIZATION; EXPRESSION
   ANALYSIS; REFERENCE GENOME; CLONING; POLYMORPHISMS; RUFESCENS; FERRITIN;
   BACTERIA
AB Abalone (Haliotis discus hannai) is one of the most valuable marine aquatic species in Korea, Japan and China. Tremendous exposure to bacterial infection is common in aquaculture environment, especially by Vibrio sp. infections. It's therefore necessary and urgent to understand the mechanism of H. discus hannai host defense against Vibrio parahemolyticus infection. However studies on its immune system are hindered by the lack of genomic resources. In the present study, we sequenced the transcriptome of control and bacterial challenged H. discus hannai tissues. Totally, 138 MB of reference transcriptome were obtained from de novo assembly of 34 GB clean bases from ten different libraries and annotated with the biological terms (GO and KEGG). A total of 10,575 transcripts exhibiting the differentially expression at least one pair of comparison and the functional annotations highlight genes related to immune response, cell adhesion, immune regulators, redox molecules and mitochondrial coding genes. Mostly, these groups of genes were dominated in hemocytes compared to other tissues. This work is a prerequisite for the identification of those physiological traits controlling H. discus hannai ability to survive against Vibrio infection.
TC 9
Z9 9
SN 1932-6203
PD APR 18
PY 2016
VL 11
IS 4
AR e0153474
DI 10.1371/journal.pone.0153474
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000374527000023
PM 27088873
ER

PT J
AU Bolam, SG
   Mcllwaine, PSO
   Garcia, C
AF Bolam, S. G.
   Mcllwaine, P. S. O.
   Garcia, C.
TI Application of biological traits to further our understanding of the
   impacts of dredged material disposal on benthic assemblages
SO MARINE POLLUTION BULLETIN
DT Article
DE Disposal; Effect traits; Response traits; Function; Benthos; Licencing
ID FUNCTIONAL COMPOSITION; SECONDARY PRODUCTION; ECOSYSTEM FUNCTION;
   SPECIES TRAITS; INVERTEBRATE COMMUNITIES; COASTAL ENVIRONMENT;
   CONTINENTAL-SHELF; ADRIATIC SEA; ANALYSIS BTA; DISTURBANCE
AB While the effects of coastal disposal of dredged material on benthic assemblage structure have been well studied, our understanding of the mechanism of such responses, and their potential ecological implications, remain relatively unknown. Data from a licenced disposal site off the northeast coast of England are analysed to address this and improve our ability to make informed licencing decisions for this activity. Assemblages within the disposal site displayed reduced number of species and total invertebrate density, an altered assemblage taxonomic structure, and a shift towards a greater numerical dominance of less-productive individuals. Following separate analyses of biological response and effect traits, a novel approach for marine benthic trait analysis, we identify the traits responsible (i.e. response traits) for the observed structural alterations. Furthermore, analysis of the effect traits revealed that the assemblages characterising the disposal site possess a greater bioturbative capability compared to those not directly impacted by disposal. (C) 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
TC 12
Z9 12
SN 0025-326X
EI 1879-3363
PD APR 15
PY 2016
VL 105
IS 1
BP 180
EP 192
DI 10.1016/j.marpolbul.2016.02.031
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000375816000035
PM 26899157
ER

PT J
AU Pan, CW
   Chuang, YL
   Chou, LS
   Chen, MH
   Lin, HJ
AF Pan, Ching-Wen
   Chuang, Yi-Li
   Chou, Lien-Siang
   Chen, Meng-Hsien
   Lin, Hsing-Juh
TI Factors governing phytoplankton biomass and production in tropical
   estuaries of western Taiwan
SO CONTINENTAL SHELF RESEARCH
DT Article
DE Functional trait; Irradiance; P-E curve; SiO2; Temperature; Turbidity
ID SAN-FRANCISCO BAY; EAST CHINA SEA; MARINE DIATOMS; COASTAL ECOSYSTEMS;
   COMMUNITY ECOLOGY; CERATIUM-FURCA; NITROGEN; GROWTH; LIGHT;
   EUTROPHICATION
AB Factors governing phytoplankton community composition and production in tropical estuaries remain mostly unknown. We aimed to quantify phytoplankton biomass, production, and community composition seasonally in 2 tropical estuaries with different levels of nutrient concentrations and turbidity, and we compared them with an offshore control site on the western coast of central Taiwan for two years. Phytoplankton biomass and production varied with season and site. Annual integrated primary production showed that these three sites were mesotrophic systems. Spearman rank correlations showed that phytoplankton biomass and production were positively correlated with water temperature, but negatively correlated with turbidity. The threshold of turbidity was 12 Nephelometric Turbidity Units (NTU), above which phytoplankton chlorophyll a concentrations were <0.5 mg m(-3), and gross production rate was <100 mg C m(-3) d(-1). The results of nonmetric multidimensional scaling (MDS) showed that the community was primarily structured by season and secondarily by site. The functional traits further showed that turbidity, water temperature, and SiO2 concentration were governing factors for the variations in the community. In summary, turbidity was the main factor governing phytoplankton biomass and production, whereas water temperature and SiO2 concentration had both a direct effect on production and an indirect effect by changing community composition. (C) 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
OI Chou, Lien-Siang/0000-0003-4610-5257
TC 8
Z9 8
SN 0278-4343
EI 1873-6955
PD APR 15
PY 2016
VL 118
BP 88
EP 99
DI 10.1016/j.csr.2016.02.015
SC Oceanography
UT WOS:000374078400007
ER

PT J
AU Juriado, I
   Kamara, ML
   Oja, E
AF Juriado, Inga
   Kaemaerae, Marja-Liisa
   Oja, Ede
TI Environmental factors and ground disturbance affecting the composition
   of species and functional traits of ground layer lichens on grey dunes
   and dune heaths of Estonia
SO NORDIC JOURNAL OF BOTANY
DT Article
ID INLAND DRIFT SANDS; ALVAR GRASSLANDS; COASTAL DUNES; BALTIC SEA;
   VEGETATION; COMMUNITIES; SUCCESSION; DIVERSITY; IMPACTS; SOIL
AB A unique, species-rich and endangered lichen biota can be found on European coastal and inland sand dunes. However, it is increasingly affected by natural succession as well as by anthropogenic disturbances. We studied lichen diversity on the grey dunes and dune heaths of coastal and inland regions of Estonia. A total of 28 study plots were investigated; in each 0.1 ha study plot general environmental variables and anthropogenic disturbances were described and all epigeic lichen species were identified. We found 66 lichenized fungus (lichen) species, including several rare and ten red-listed lichens. Multivariate analysis (DCA, CCA) was performed to examine gradients in species composition and to relate variation in species data to environmental factors. In addition, we used redundancy analysis (RDA) to relate variation in species' trait composition to environmental factors. Species composition on grey dunes differed significantly from that on dune heaths. The characteristic species for grey dunes are, besides several Cladonia species, foliose lichens, e.g. Hypogymnia physodes, Parmelia sulcata and Peltigera spp. Also species' traits composition was different for either habitat, indicating that sorediate lichens, foliose lichens, lichens with cyanobacterium as the main photobiont, and sparsely branched Cladonia species dominate on grey dunes, while esorediate, green-algal, crustose and richly branched fruticose lichens are common on dune heaths. Soil pH was the most essential environmental variable for determining both species composition and species' traits composition. The composition of lichen species was also significantly influenced by forest closeness, soil Mg content and cover of bare sand; the effect of ground disturbances was low compared to the effect of these environmental factors. To protect and conserve the species-rich lichen biota, it is necessary to protect the dune habitats from building activity, to avoid overtrampling in recreation areas and to regularly remove shrubs and trees.
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 0107-055X
EI 1756-1051
PD APR
PY 2016
VL 34
IS 2
BP 244
EP 255
DI 10.1111/njb.00936
SC Plant Sciences
UT WOS:000374045500018
ER

PT J
AU Rolo, V
   Olivier, PI
   Guldemond, RAR
   van Aarde, RJ
AF Rolo, Victor
   Olivier, Pieter I.
   Guldemond, Robert A. R.
   van Aarde, Rudolph J.
TI Validating space-for-time substitution in a new-growth coastal dune
   forest
SO APPLIED VEGETATION SCIENCE
DT Article
DE Chronosequence; Community assembly processes; Forest restoration;
   Functional diversity; Null models; Pioneer species; Subtropical forest
ID FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; PLANT-COMMUNITIES; SOUTH-AFRICA; SUCCESSION;
   TRAITS; VEGETATION; LANDSCAPE; RESTORATION; PATTERNS; CHRONOSEQUENCES
AB Questions: Can trends derived from chronosequences (space) be compared with those derived from repeated surveys (time) to validate the use of space-for-time substitution? Can this approach provide insight into the dynamics of vegetation in rehabilitating forests?
   Location: Rehabilitating coastal dune forest in KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa.
   Methods: We surveyed sapling and adult trees in seven study sites with similar abiotic conditions that were rehabilitated after mining. Sites ranged in age from 1 to 24 yr in 2001 and we repeated the surveys in 2005 and 2010. We related patterns of change in community attributes (e.g. species composition, turnover, taxonomic and functional diversity) to site age. We compared functional diversity indices (e.g. functional dispersion and evenness) with a random community to infer the ecological processes that structure the tree community during forest development. We focused on the magnitude and direction of change predicted by the 2001 chronosequence with the values returned from subsequent surveys.
   Results: Species composition changed during forest development. Species richness increased and species turnover decreased. Null models indicated that early stages of forest development had lower functional diversity than expected from a random community, indicating convergence in reproductive traits in early succession. Late stages of forest development showed higher functional diversity. Apart from species composition, the rest of the community attributes recorded from repeated surveys confirmed the predictions made by the chronosequence.
   Conclusions: The trajectory of plant community succession observed in space across a chronosequence was supported by the site-specific findings derived from long-term monitoring. In the case of our study system (rehabilitating dune forests), space-for-time substitution works. The main drivers of species co-existence changed from environmental filtering and/or dispersal limitation to niche complementarity as these forests developed.
OI Rolo, Victor/0000-0001-5854-9512
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 1402-2001
EI 1654-109X
PD APR
PY 2016
VL 19
IS 2
BP 235
EP 243
DI 10.1111/avsc.12210
SC Plant Sciences; Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Forestry
UT WOS:000374545600008
ER

PT J
AU Kolding, J
   Jacobsen, NS
   Andersen, KH
   van Zwieten, PAM
AF Kolding, Jeppe
   Jacobsen, Nis S.
   Andersen, Ken H.
   van Zwieten, Paul A. M.
TI Maximizing fisheries yields while maintaining community structure
SO CANADIAN JOURNAL OF FISHERIES AND AQUATIC SCIENCES
DT Article; Proceedings Paper
CT Symposium on Size-Based Approaches at the 144th Meeting of the
   American-Fisheries-Society
CY AUG, 2014
CL Quebec, CANADA
ID MARINE ECOSYSTEMS; SIZE SPECTRA; LAKE KARIBA; FISH; MANAGEMENT; MODEL;
   EXPLOITATION; ABUNDANCE; PATTERNS; ECOLOGY
AB Under the ecosystem approach to fisheries, an optimal fishing pattern is one that gives the highest possible yield while having the least structural impact on the community. Unregulated, open -access African inland fisheries have been observed to sustain high catches by harvesting a broad spectrum of species and sizes, often in conflict with current management regulations in terms of mesh and gear regulations. Using a size- and trait-based model, we explore whether such exploitation patterns are commensurable with the ecosystem approach to fisheries by comparing the impacts on size spectrum slope and yield with the different size limit regimes employed in the Zambian and Zimbabwean sides of man-made Lake Kariba. Long-term multispecies data under fished and unfislied conditions are used to compare and validate the model results. Both model and observations show that the highest yields and low structural impact on the ecosystem are obtained by targeting small individuals in the community. These results call for a re-evaluation of the size -based management regulations that are ubiquitous in most fisheries.
RI van Zwieten, P.A.M./C-4759-2008
OI van Zwieten, P.A.M./0000-0003-2627-2373; Andersen, Ken
   Haste/0000-0002-8478-3430
TC 15
Z9 15
SN 0706-652X
EI 1205-7533
PD APR
PY 2016
VL 73
IS 4
BP 644
EP 655
DI 10.1139/cjfas-2015-0098
SC Fisheries; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000375424700016
ER

PT J
AU Alldred, M
   Baines, SB
AF Alldred, Mary
   Baines, Stephen B.
TI Effects of wetland plants on denitrification rates: a meta-analysis
SO ECOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS
DT Article
DE community structure; ecosystem services; functional traits; global
   change; nitrogen cycle
ID ENGLAND SALT-MARSH; FUNCTIONAL CLASSIFICATION; MODELING DENITRIFICATION;
   POTAMOGETON-PERFOLIATUS; ECOSYSTEM PROCESSES; MARINE ECOSYSTEMS; CYCLING
   PROCESSES; NITROGEN; ECOLOGY; TRAITS
AB Human activity is accelerating changes in biotic communities worldwide. Predicting impacts of these changes on ecosystem services such as denitrification, a process that mitigates the consequences of nitrogen pollution, remains one of the most important challenges facing ecologists. Wetlands especially are valued as important sites of denitrification, and wetland plants are expected to have differing effects on denitrification. We present the results of a meta-analysis, conducted on 419 published estimates of denitrification in wetlands dominated by different plant species. Plants increased denitrification rates by 55% on average. This effect varied significantly among communities as defined by the dominant plant species, but surprisingly did not differ substantially among methods for measuring denitrification or among types of wetlands. We conclude that mechanistically linking functional plant traits to denitrification will be key to predicting the role of wetlands in nitrogen mitigation in a changing world.
TC 9
Z9 12
SN 1051-0761
EI 1939-5582
PD APR
PY 2016
VL 26
IS 3
BP 676
EP 685
DI 10.1890/14-1525
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000374840500003
PM 27411242
ER

PT J
AU Schmidt, ML
   White, JD
   Denef, VJ
AF Schmidt, Marian L.
   White, Jeffrey D.
   Denef, Vincent J.
TI Phylogenetic conservation of freshwater lake habitat preference varies
   between abundant bacterioplankton phyla
SO ENVIRONMENTAL MICROBIOLOGY
DT Article
ID BACTERIAL COMMUNITY COMPOSITION; PARTICLE-ATTACHED BACTERIA; NW
   MEDITERRANEAN SEA; 16S RIBOSOMAL-RNA; TROPHIC STATUS;
   NITROGEN-METABOLISM; SEASONAL DYNAMICS; DIVERSITY; ECOSYSTEM; PATTERNS
AB Despite their homogeneous appearance, aquatic systems harbour heterogeneous habitats resulting from nutrient gradients, suspended particulate matter and stratification. Recent reports suggest phylogenetically conserved habitat preferences among bacterioplankton, particularly for particle-associated (PA) and free-living (FL) habitats. Here, we show that independent of lake nutrient level and layer, PA and FL abundance-weighted bacterial community composition (BCC) differed and that inter-lake BCC varied more for PA than for FL fractions. In low-nutrient lakes, BCC differences between PA and FL fractions were larger than those between lake layers. The reverse was true for high-nutrient lakes. Nutrient level affected BCC more in hypolimnia than in epilimnia, likely due to hypolimnetic hypoxia in high-nutrient lakes. In line with previous reports, we observed within-phylum operational taxonomic unit (OTU) habitat preference conservation, although not for all phyla, including the phylum with the highest average relative abundance across all habitats (Bacteroidetes). Consistent phylum-level habitat preferences may indicate that the functional traits that underpin ecological adaptation of freshwater bacteria to lake habitats can be phylogenetically conserved, although the levels of conservation are phylum dependent. Resolving taxa preferences for freshwater habitats sets the stage for identification of traits that underpin habitat specialization and associated functional traits that influence differences in biogeochemical cycling across freshwater lake habitats.
TC 16
Z9 16
SN 1462-2912
EI 1462-2920
PD APR
PY 2016
VL 18
IS 4
BP 1212
EP 1226
DI 10.1111/1462-2920.13143
SC Microbiology
UT WOS:000374648500012
PM 26631909
ER

PT J
AU Ciccarelli, D
   Picciarelli, P
   Bedini, G
   Sorce, C
AF Ciccarelli, Daniela
   Picciarelli, Piero
   Bedini, Gianni
   Sorce, Carlo
TI Mediterranean sea cliff plants: morphological and physiological
   responses to environmental conditions
SO JOURNAL OF PLANT ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE leaf water potential; phenotypic plasticity; photosynthetic efficiency;
   plant functional types
ID CISTUS-ALBIDUS L.; QUERCUS-ILEX L; PHOTOCHEMICAL EFFICIENCY;
   PHOTOINHIBITORY DAMAGE; FIELD CONDITIONS; PHOTOSYNTHESIS; STRESS;
   LEAVES; LIGHT; SHRUB
AB Aims
   The plants of Mediterranean sea cliff ecosystems are resistant to several environmental challenges. In this study, six species typical of the coastal rocky cliffs have been analyzed in order to evaluate their diverse morphological and physiological responses to their environment across the seasons, and to examine the strategy of the ecological group to which each species belongs. Since these species are widespread across the Mediterranean region, our aim was also to highlight their ecophysiological features in habitats where the direct influence of the sea is stronger.
   Methods
   The selected species are characteristic of the sea cliffs of Elba island (Tyrrhenian sea, Italy): the halophyte Crithmum maritimum, the semideciduous Helichrysum italicum and Lavandula stoechas and the sclerophylls Myrtus communis, Quercus ilex and Rhamnus alaternus. Four morphological traits-canopy height, leaf area, specific leaf area and leaf dry matter content- and two physiological traits-leaf water potential (LWP) and photosynthetic efficiency (PE), measured before the dawn and at midday-were analyzed. Water potential was measured by a pressure chamber and photosynthetic efficiency was determined by the analysis of chlorophyll fluorescence. Plant performance was also evaluated by calculating chronic (PIchr) and dynamic photoinhibition (PIdyn).
   Important Findings
   Crithmum maritimum showed high resistance to the recurrent dry periods, because of the high water storage capacity of its leaves and its PE declined markedly only in July, under the harshest climatic conditions. Semideciduous taxa utilize primarily an avoidance strategy, which aims at reducing the overall leaf surface, while sclerophylls mostly show a tolerance strategy towards the prevailing stressors, as demonstrated by LWP and PE, that are lower in the sclerophylls than in the semideciduous taxa during summer, due to osmoregulation and photoinhibition, respectively.
   Furthermore, variability of physiological parameters was higher in the sclerophylls than in the semideciduous taxa, because the former had to withstand wider oscillations of their LWP and PE. The sclerophyllous taxa underwent a slight loss of PE also in winter, likely owing to the combined action of low temperature and high irradiance. In Mediterranean sea cliff ecosystems, the stressful combination of high irradiance, high temperatures and low rainfall typical of the summer season may have been intensified by the shallow soil which displays a poor water storage capacity. On the other hand, winter stress, caused by high solar radiation and low temperatures, does not seem to seriously affect the performance of the studied species.
RI Bedini, Gianni/U-7662-2017
TC 9
Z9 9
SN 1752-9921
EI 1752-993X
PD APR
PY 2016
VL 9
IS 2
BP 153
EP 164
DI 10.1093/jpe/rtv042
SC Plant Sciences; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000374192300005
ER

PT J
AU Hebert, MP
   Beisner, BE
   Maranger, R
AF Hebert, Marie-Pier
   Beisner, Beatrix E.
   Maranger, Roxane
TI A meta-analysis of zooplankton functional traits influencing ecosystem
   function
SO ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE body size; ecosystem functioning; effect traits; physiology; zooplankton
ID FRESH-WATER ECOSYSTEMS; BODY-MASS; SCALING METABOLISM;
   NITROGEN-EXCRETION; MARINE ZOOPLANKTON; CURRENT KNOWLEDGE;
   EMPIRICAL-MODELS; SIZE STRUCTURE; 3/4-POWER LAW; RATES
AB The use of functional traits to characterize community composition has been proposed as a more effective way to link community structure to ecosystem functioning. Organismal morphology, body stoichiometry, and physiology can be readily linked to large scale ecosystem processes through functional traits that inform on interspecific and species environment interactions; yet such effect traits are still poorly included in trait based approaches. Given their key trophic position in aquatic ecosystems, individual zooplankton affect energy fluxes and elemental processing. We compiled a large database of zooplankton traits contributing to carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorus cycling and examined the effect of classification and habitat (marine vs. freshwater) on trait relationships. Respiration and nutrient excretion rates followed mass dependent scaling in both habitats, with exponents ranging from 0.70 to 0.90. Our analyses revealed surprising differences in allometry and respiration between habitats, with freshwater species having lower length-specific mass and three times higher mass specific respiration rates. These differences in traits point to implications for ecological strategies as well as overall carbon storage and fluxes based on habitat type. Our synthesis quantifies multiple trait relationships and links organisms to ecosystem processes they influence, enabling a more complete integration of aquatic community ecology and biogeochemistry through the promising use of effect traits.
OI Maranger, Roxane/0000-0002-2509-4678; Beisner,
   Beatrix/0000-0001-6972-6887
TC 12
Z9 12
SN 0012-9658
EI 1939-9170
PD APR
PY 2016
VL 97
IS 4
BP 1069
EP 1080
DI 10.1890/15-1084.1
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000373923100025
PM 28792594
ER

PT J
AU Willson, JD
   Winne, CT
AF Willson, J. D.
   Winne, C. T.
TI Evaluating the functional importance of secretive species: A case study
   of aquatic snake predators in isolated wetlands
SO JOURNAL OF ZOOLOGY
DT Article
DE Predation; prey consumption; biomass; food web; mark-recapture;
   wetlands; Nerodia fasciata; Seminatrix pygaea
ID BROWN TREESNAKES; POPULATION ESTIMATION; ECOSYSTEM PROCESSES;
   ENERGY-FLOW; SALAMANDERS; DETECTABILITY; RECAPTURE; DIVERSITY;
   ABUNDANCE; DECLINES
AB Although the need to prioritize limited conservation resources has prompted increased interest in understanding the functional importance of species within ecosystems, species that are infrequently observed are often written off as being unimportant. In this study, we use aquatic snakes as a case study for examining the importance of secretive predators. Most snakes are extremely cryptic and secretive, traits that not only lead to the perception that they are rare, and of minor importance, but also impede attempts to quantify densities. We used high sampling effort and robust-design capture-recapture analyses to estimate density of aquatic snakes inhabiting an isolated 5.4-ha wetland in South Carolina, USA. We assessed snake diets and coupled field measurements of growth rates with laboratory-derived data on mass conversion efficiency to estimate prey consumption by snakes over a 1-year period. We found a peak density 171 snakes ha(-1) of wetland habitat, corresponding to a standing biomass of 7.77kgha(-1). We calculated that snakes within the wetland consumed a total of over 200kg (>55000 individuals) of amphibian prey annually, translating into >150000kJha(-1) of energy flow from secondary to tertiary consumers within the wetland food web. Further, because many amphibians are primarily terrestrial as adults and are consumed by aquatic snakes only when they return to wetlands to breed, snakes can be responsible for substantial transfer of energy and biomass between terrestrial and aquatic habitats. Our study is one of the first comprehensive evaluations of the importance of snakes as predators and underscores the need to consider snakes in initiatives aimed at preserving overall ecosystem integrity.
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 0952-8369
EI 1469-7998
PD APR
PY 2016
VL 298
IS 4
BP 266
EP 273
DI 10.1111/jzo.12311
SC Zoology
UT WOS:000374167200005
ER

PT J
AU Leigh, C
   Bonada, N
   Boulton, AJ
   Hugueny, B
   Larned, ST
   Vorste, RV
   Datry, T
AF Leigh, Catherine
   Bonada, Nuria
   Boulton, Andrew J.
   Hugueny, Bernard
   Larned, Scott T.
   Vorste, Ross Vander
   Datry, Thibault
TI Invertebrate assemblage responses and the dual roles of resistance and
   resilience to drying in intermittent rivers
SO AQUATIC SCIENCES
DT Article
DE Climate; Disturbance; Invertebrate community; Traits; Persistence;
   Temporary river
ID STREAM MACROINVERTEBRATE COMMUNITIES; PRESENCE-ABSENCE DATA; DESERT
   STREAM; TEMPORAL VARIABILITY; FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; FLOW INTERMITTENCE;
   MULTIPLE TRAITS; NEW-ZEALAND; DROUGHT; DISTURBANCE
AB Intermittent rivers are naturally dynamic ecosystems in which flow cessation and riverbed drying cause temporal fluctuations in aquatic biodiversity. We analysed datasets from intermittent rivers in different climate zones across the world to examine responses of aquatic macroinvertebrate assemblages to drying, in relation to both taxonomic composition and traits of resistance and resilience. First, we compared the differences in taxonomic richness and turnover and in trait diversity, richness and redundancy before and after intermittent sites dried with the differences in concurrently sampled perennial sites. We found such high levels of variation in the before-after differences at intermittent and perennial sites that we could not detect statistical differences between them. Second, we examined the effects of climate (arid, Mediterranean, temperate) and durations of dry and post-dry (flowing) periods on responses to drying at intermittent sites. Only climate had a detectable effect; the proportion of taxa at intermittent sites that persisted through drying-rewetting phases was greatest in arid-zone rivers. Regardless of climate, the invertebrates that persisted at intermittent sites were dominated by taxa resistant to drying. By contrast, taxa that persisted at perennial sites had fewer traits conferring resistance but more conferring resilience. The contributions of resistance and resilience combined with the presence of both intermittent and perennial reaches likely supports the long-term stability and persistence of communities in intermittent rivers, despite the inherently high variation in short-term responses to drying.
RI Leigh, Catherine/B-8868-2009
OI Leigh, Catherine/0000-0003-4186-1678
TC 36
Z9 36
SN 1015-1621
EI 1420-9055
PD APR
PY 2016
VL 78
IS 2
BP 291
EP 301
DI 10.1007/s00027-015-0427-2
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000372599000008
ER

PT J
AU Fraschetti, S
   Guarnieri, G
   Gambi, C
   Bevilacqua, S
   Terlizzi, A
   Danovaro, R
AF Fraschetti, S.
   Guarnieri, G.
   Gambi, C.
   Bevilacqua, S.
   Terlizzi, A.
   Danovaro, R.
TI Impact of offshore gas platforms on the structural and functional
   biodiversity of nematodes
SO MARINE ENVIRONMENTAL RESEARCH
DT Article
DE Benthic ecology; Offshore structures; Nematodes; Community function;
   Spatial variability
ID GULF-OF-MEXICO; BOTTOM BENTHIC COMMUNITIES; MEDITERRANEAN-SEA; DEEP-SEA;
   CONTINENTAL-SHELF; NORTH-SEA; MACROFAUNA ASSEMBLAGES; TAXONOMIC
   COMPOSITION; MEIOFAUNA RESPONSE; BETA-DIVERSITY
AB The Mediterranean Sea hosts hundreds of offshore gas platforms, whose activity represents a potential threat to marine ecosystems. Evidence from several studies indicates that nematodes can be highly sensitive to changes in the environmental quality. Here, we investigated the response of nematode assemblages to the presence of offshore gas platforms (located in the central Mediterranean Sea) in terms of spatial heterogeneity, structural and functional diversity. Since the effect of the investigated offshore platforms on macrofaunal assemblages were previously assessed by Terlizzi et al. (2008), the study provided also the opportunity to compare the response of different benthic compartments to the same impact related to fossil fuel extraction on marine environments. The platforms had a significant impact on nematode assemblages up to 1000 m distance from the structure. The effects were evident in term of: a) more homogeneous spatial distribution of nematode assemblages, b) increased trophic diversity of deposit feeders and c) changes in life strategies with an increase of opportunistic species in sediments closer to the platforms. Such effects seemed to be related to the dimension of the platform structures, rather than to chemical pollution or changes in food availability. These findings suggest that the platforms exert a physical alteration of the surrounding environment that is reflected by altered structural and functional traits of nematode biodiversity. The use of nematodes for monitoring the effects of the platforms only partially matched with the results obtained using macrofauna, providing further insights on potential outcomes on the functional response of marine assemblages to fossil fuel extraction. (C) 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
OI Terlizzi, Antonio/0000-0001-5968-4548; Bevilacqua,
   Stanislao/0000-0002-6417-7134; Guarnieri, Giuseppe/0000-0002-7334-9030
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 0141-1136
EI 1879-0291
PD APR
PY 2016
VL 115
BP 56
EP 64
DI 10.1016/j.marenvres.2016.02.001
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology;
   Toxicology
UT WOS:000372557500007
PM 26878347
ER

PT J
AU Godoy, BS
   Simiao-Ferreira, J
   Lodi, S
   Oliveira, LG
AF Godoy, B. S.
   Simiao-Ferreira, J.
   Lodi, S.
   Oliveira, L. G.
TI Functional Process Zones Characterizing Aquatic Insect Communities in
   Streams of the Brazilian Cerrado
SO NEOTROPICAL ENTOMOLOGY
DT Article
DE Bayesian inference; conservation; functional feeding groups;
   macroinvertebrates; river classification
ID RIVER CONTINUUM CONCEPT; LANDSCAPE ECOLOGY; SPECIES TRAITS; FEEDING
   GROUPS; ECOSYSTEM; NETWORKS; MACROINVERTEBRATES; DIVERSITY; RICHNESS;
   DYNAMICS
AB Stream ecology studies see to understand ecological dynamics in lotic systems. The characterization of streams into Functional Process Zones (FPZ) has been currently debated in stream ecology because aquatic communities respond to functional processes of river segments. Therefore, we tested if different functional process zones have different number of genera and trophic structure using the aquatic insect community of Neotropical streams. We also assessed whether using physical and chemical variables may complement the approach of using FPZ to model communities of aquatic insects in Cerrado streams. This study was conducted in 101 streams or rivers from the central region of the state of Goias, Brazil. We grouped the streams into six FPZ associated to size of the river system, presence of riparian forest, and riverbed heterogeneity. We used Bayesian models to compare number of genera and relative frequency of the feeding groups between FPZs. Streams classified in different FPZs had a different number of genera, and the largest and best preserved rivers had an average of four additional genera. Trophic structure exhibited low variability among FPZs, with little difference both in the number of genera and in abundance. Using functional process zones in Cerrado streams yielded good results for Ephemeroptera, Plecoptera, and Trichoptera communities. Thus, species distribution and community structure in the river basin account for functional processes and not necessarily for the position of the community along a longitudinal dimension of the lotic system.
OI Lodi, Sara/0000-0001-8318-6362; Godoy, Bruno/0000-0001-9751-9885
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 1519-566X
EI 1678-8052
PD APR
PY 2016
VL 45
IS 2
BP 159
EP 169
DI 10.1007/s13744-015-0352-z
SC Entomology
UT WOS:000372293900007
PM 26830433
ER

PT J
AU Andersen, KH
   Jacobsen, NS
   Farnsworth, KD
AF Andersen, Ken H.
   Jacobsen, Nis S.
   Farnsworth, K. D.
TI The theoretical foundations for size spectrum models of fish communities
SO CANADIAN JOURNAL OF FISHERIES AND AQUATIC SCIENCES
DT Article; Proceedings Paper
CT Symposium on Size-Based Approaches at the 144th Meeting of the
   American-Fisheries-Society
CY AUG, 2014
CL Quebec, CANADA
ID STRUCTURED ENERGY-FLOW; CENTRAL NORTH PACIFIC; MARINE ECOSYSTEMS;
   CLIMATE-CHANGE; BODY-SIZE; REPRODUCTIVE STRATEGY; MULTISPECIES MODEL;
   NATURAL MORTALITY; TRADE-OFFS; FISHERIES
AB Size spectrum models have emerged from 40 years of basic research on how body size determines individual physiology and structures marine communities. They are based on commonly accepted assumptions and have a low parameter set, making them easy to deploy for strategic ecosystem-oriented impact assessment of fisheries. We describe the fundamental concepts in size-based models about food encounter and the bioenergetics budget of individuals. Within the general framework, three model types have emerged that differ in their degree of complexity: the food-web, the trait-based, and the community models. We demonstrate the differences between the models through examples of their response to fishing and their dynamic behavior. We review implementations of size spectrum models and describe important variations concerning the functional response, whether growth is food-dependent or fixed, and the density dependence imposed on the system. Finally, we discuss challenges and promising directions.
OI Andersen, Ken Haste/0000-0002-8478-3430
TC 16
Z9 18
SN 0706-652X
EI 1205-7533
PD APR
PY 2016
VL 73
IS 4
BP 575
EP 588
DI 10.1139/cjfas-2015-0230
SC Fisheries; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000375424700011
ER

PT J
AU Melia, P
   Schiavina, M
   Rossetto, M
   Gatto, M
   Fraschetti, S
   Casagrandi, R
AF Melia, Paco
   Schiavina, Marcello
   Rossetto, Marisa
   Gatto, Marino
   Fraschetti, Simonetta
   Casagrandi, Renato
TI Looking for hotspots of marine metacommunity connectivity: a
   methodological framework
SO SCIENTIFIC REPORTS
DT Article
ID PHYSICAL-BIOLOGICAL INTERACTIONS; RESERVE NETWORKS; SEASCAPE GENETICS;
   LARVAL DISPERSAL; ADRIATIC SEA; FISH POPULATIONS; PROTECTED AREAS;
   CORAL-REEFS; CONSERVATION; MANAGEMENT
AB Seascape connectivity critically affects the spatiotemporal dynamics of marine metacommunities. Understanding how connectivity patterns emerge from physically and biologically-mediated interactions is therefore crucial to conserve marine ecosystem functions and biodiversity. Here, we develop a set of biophysical models to explore connectivity in assemblages of species belonging to a typical Mediterranean community (Posidonia oceanica meadows) and characterized by different dispersing traits. We propose a novel methodological framework to synthesize species-specific results into a set of community connectivity metrics and show that spatiotemporal variation in magnitude and direction of the connections, as well as interspecific differences in dispersing traits, are key factors structuring community connectivity. We eventually demonstrate how these metrics can be used to characterize the functional role of each marine area in determining patterns of community connectivity at the basin level and to support marine conservation planning.
RI Gatto, Marino/D-9531-2012; Schiavina, Marcello/J-8287-2013; Melia,
   Paco/E-8844-2012
OI Gatto, Marino/0000-0001-8063-9178; Schiavina,
   Marcello/0000-0003-3399-3400; Melia, Paco/0000-0002-7763-9836;
   Casagrandi, Renato/0000-0001-5177-803X
TC 10
Z9 10
SN 2045-2322
PD MAR 31
PY 2016
VL 6
AR 23705
DI 10.1038/srep23705
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000373090600001
PM 27029563
ER

PT J
AU Madin, JS
   Anderson, KD
   Andreasen, MH
   Bridge, TCL
   Cairns, SD
   Connolly, SR
   Darling, ES
   Diaz, M
   Falster, DS
   Franklin, EC
   Gates, RD
   Hoogenboom, MO
   Huang, D
   Keith, SA
   Kosnik, MA
   Kuo, CY
   Lough, JM
   Lovelock, CE
   Luiz, O
   Martinelli, J
   Mizerek, T
   Pandolfi, JM
   Pochon, X
   Pratchett, MS
   Putnam, HM
   Roberts, TE
   Stat, M
   Wallace, CC
   Widman, E
   Baird, AH
AF Madin, Joshua S.
   Anderson, Kristen D.
   Andreasen, Magnus Heide
   Bridge, Tom C. L.
   Cairns, Stephen D.
   Connolly, Sean R.
   Darling, Emily S.
   Diaz, Marcela
   Falster, Daniel S.
   Franklin, Erik C.
   Gates, Ruth D.
   Hoogenboom, Mia O.
   Huang, Danwei
   Keith, Sally A.
   Kosnik, Matthew A.
   Kuo, Chao-Yang
   Lough, Janice M.
   Lovelock, Catherine E.
   Luiz, Osmar
   Martinelli, Julieta
   Mizerek, Toni
   Pandolfi, John M.
   Pochon, Xavier
   Pratchett, Morgan S.
   Putnam, Hollie M.
   Roberts, T. Edward
   Stat, Michael
   Wallace, Carden C.
   Widman, Elizabeth
   Baird, Andrew H.
TI The Coral Trait Database, a curated database of trait information for
   coral species from the global oceans
SO SCIENTIFIC DATA
DT Article; Data Paper
ID GREAT-BARRIER-REEF; POCILLOPORA-DAMICORNIS LINNAEUS; CNIDARIA ANTHOZOA
   SCLERACTINIA; GALAPAGOS-ISLANDS ECUADOR; PACIFIC COSTA-RICA; KAVARATTI
   ATOLL LAKSHADWEEP; GROWTH-RATES INDICATE; ACROPORA-ASPERA DANA; 2
   HERMATYPIC CORALS; GULF-OF-MEXICO
AB Trait-based approaches advance ecological and evolutionary research because traits provide a strong link to an organism's function and fitness. Trait-based research might lead to a deeper understanding of the functions of, and services provided by, ecosystems, thereby improving management, which is vital in the current era of rapid environmental change. Coral reef scientists have long collected trait data for corals; however, these are difficult to access and often under-utilized in addressing large-scale questions. We present the Coral Trait Database initiative that aims to bring together physiological, morphological, ecological, phylogenetic and biogeographic trait information into a single repository. The database houses species-and individual-level data from published field and experimental studies alongside contextual data that provide important framing for analyses. In this data descriptor, we release data for 56 traits for 1547 species, and present a collaborative platform on which other trait data are being actively federated. Our overall goal is for the Coral Trait Database to become an open-source, community-led data clearinghouse that accelerates coral reef research.
RI publicationpage, cmec/B-4405-2017; Keith, Sally/H-2453-2014; Hoogenboom,
   Mia/D-3664-2012; Lovelock, Catherine/G-7370-2012; Huang,
   Danwei/C-4525-2016
OI Keith, Sally/0000-0002-9634-2763; Hoogenboom, Mia/0000-0003-3709-6344;
   Lovelock, Catherine/0000-0002-2219-6855; Falster,
   Daniel/0000-0002-9814-092X; Connolly, Sean/0000-0003-1537-0859;
   Anderson, Kristen/0000-0002-1576-6979; Lough,
   Janice/0000-0002-3789-1009; Madin, Joshua/0000-0002-5005-6227; Bridge,
   Tom/0000-0003-3951-284X; Putnam, Hollie/0000-0003-2322-3269; Kosnik,
   Matthew/0000-0001-5380-7041; Darling, Emily/0000-0002-1048-2838
TC 29
Z9 29
SN 2052-4463
PD MAR 29
PY 2016
VL 3
AR UNSP 160017
DI 10.1038/sdata.2016.17
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000390214200001
PM 27023900
ER

PT J
AU Pecuchet, L
   Tornroos, A
   Lindegren, M
AF Pecuchet, Laurene
   Tornroos, Anna
   Lindegren, Martin
TI Patterns and drivers of fish community assembly in a large marine
   ecosystem
SO MARINE ECOLOGY PROGRESS SERIES
DT Article
DE Traits; Demersal fish; Baltic Sea; Assembly rule; Community; Abiotic;
   Competition; Functional richness; Biodiversity
ID FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY INDEXES; BALTIC SEA; LIMITING SIMILARITY; UNIFIED
   APPROACH; REGIONAL-SCALE; TRAITS; ECOLOGY; RULES; DISSIMILARITY;
   BIODIVERSITY
AB The presence and survival of the species in a community depend on their abilities to maximize fitness in a given environment. The study of the processes that control survival and co-existence, termed 'assembly rules', follows various mechanisms, primarily related to biotic or abiotic factors. To determine assembly rules, ecological similarities of co-occurring species are often investigated. This can be evaluated using trait-based indices summarizing the species' niches in a given community. In order to investigate the underlying processes shaping community assembly in marine ecosystems, we investigated the patterns and drivers of fish community composition in the Baltic Sea, a semi-enclosed sea characterized by a pronounced environmental gradient. Our results showed a marked decline in species-and functional richness, largely explained by decreasing salinities. In addition, habitat complexity and oxygen were found to be significant drivers. Furthermore, we showed that the trait composition of the fish community in the western Baltic Sea is more similar than expected by random chance alone. This implies that environmental filtering, acting along the salinity gradient, is the dominant factor shaping community composition. However, community composition in the eastern part, an area beyond the steep decline in salinity, was characterized by fewer species with largely different trait characteristics, indicating that community assembly is also affected by biotic interactions. Our results add to the knowledge base of key abiotic drivers impacting marine fish communities and their vulnerability to environmental changes, a key concern for fisheries and marine ecosystem management.
OI Lindegren, Martin/0000-0002-9185-951X
TC 10
Z9 10
SN 0171-8630
EI 1616-1599
PD MAR 21
PY 2016
VL 546
BP 239
EP 248
DI 10.3354/meps11613
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology;
   Oceanography
UT WOS:000374240800019
ER

PT J
AU Turschwell, MP
   White, CR
AF Turschwell, Mischa P.
   White, Craig R.
TI The effects of laboratory housing and spatial enrichment on brain size
   and metabolic rate in the eastern mosquitofish, Gambusia holbrooki
SO BIOLOGY OPEN
DT Article
DE Brain size; Enrichment; Resting metabolic rate; Laboratory housing;
   Intra-specific
ID PHENOTYPIC PLASTICITY; ENVIRONMENTAL ENRICHMENT; ENERGY-METABOLISM;
   FISH; MAMMALS; EXPERIENCE; PREDATION; BEHAVIOR; STRESS; OXYGEN
AB It has long been hypothesised that there is a functional correlation between brain size and metabolic rate in vertebrates. The present study tested this hypothesis in wild-caught adult mosquitofish Gambusia holbrooki by testing for an intra-specific association between resting metabolic rate (RMR) and brain size while controlling for variation in body size, and through the examination of the effects of spatial enrichment and laboratory housing on body mass-independent measures of brain size and RMR. Controlling for body mass, there was no relationship between brain size and RMR in wild-caught fish. Contrary to predictions, spatial enrichment caused a decrease in mass-independent brain size, highlighting phenotypic plasticity in the adult brain. As expected, after controlling for differences in body size, wild-caught fish had relatively larger brains than fish that had been maintained in the laboratory for a minimum of six weeks, but wild-caught fish also had significantly lower mass-independent RMR. This study demonstrates that an organisms' housing environment can cause significant plastic changes to fitness related traits including brain size and RMR. We therefore conclude that current standard laboratory housing conditions may cause captive animals to be non-representative of their wild counterparts, potentially undermining the transferability of previous laboratorybased studies of aquatic ectothermic vertebrates to wild populations.
OI White, Craig/0000-0002-0200-2187
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 2046-6390
PD MAR 15
PY 2016
VL 5
IS 3
BP 205
EP 210
DI 10.1242/bio.015024
SC Life Sciences & Biomedicine - Other Topics
UT WOS:000372304500001
PM 26794608
ER

PT J
AU Biswas, N
   Maihofer, AX
   Mir, SA
   Rao, FW
   Zhang, KX
   Khandrika, S
   Mahata, M
   Friese, RS
   Hightower, CM
   Mahata, SK
   Baker, DG
   Nievergelt, CM
   Vaingankar, SM
   O'Connor, DT
AF Biswas, Nilima
   Maihofer, Adam X.
   Mir, Saiful Anam
   Rao, Fangwen
   Zhang, Kuixing
   Khandrika, Srikrishna
   Mahata, Manjula
   Friese, Ryan S.
   Hightower, C. Makena
   Mahata, Sushil K.
   Baker, Dewleen G.
   Nievergelt, Caroline M.
   Vaingankar, Sucheta M.
   O'Connor, Daniel T.
TI Polymorphisms at the F12 and KLKB1 loci have significant trait
   association with activation of the renin-angiotensin system
SO BMC MEDICAL GENETICS
DT Article
DE FXIIa (active protease encoded by gene F12 or Hageman factor);
   Kallikrein/KAL (active protease encoded for by gene KLKB1 or Fletcher
   factor); rs3733402; rs1801020; PTSD (posttraumatic stress disorder);
   Hypertension
ID GENOME-WIDE ASSOCIATION; PLASMA KALLIKREIN; HUMAN PRORENIN;
   HYPERTENSION; KIDNEY; DISEASE; PREKALLIKREIN; IDENTIFICATION; GENE;
   SUSCEPTIBILITY
AB Background: Plasma coagulation Factor XIIa (Hageman factor; encoded by F12) and kallikrein (KAL or Fletcher factor; encoded by KLKB1) are proteases of the kallikerin-kinin system involved in converting the inactive circulating prorenin to renin. Renin is a key enzyme in the formation of angiotensin II, which regulates blood pressure, fluid and electrolyte balance and is a biomarker for cardiovascular, metabolic and renal function. The renin-angiotensin system is implicated in extinction learning in posttraumatic stress disorder.
   Methods & Results: Active plasma renin was measured from two independent cohorts-civilian twins and siblings, as well as U.S. Marines, for a total of 1,180 subjects. Genotyping these subjects revealed that the carriers of the minor alleles at the two loci- F12 and KLKB1 had a significant association with reduced levels of active plasma renin. Meta-analyses confirmed the association across cohorts. In vitro studies verified digestion of human recombinant pro-renin by kallikrein (KAL) to generate active renin. Subsequently, the active renin was able to digest the synthetic substrate angiotensinogen to angiotensin-I. Examination of mouse juxtaglomerular cell line and mouse kidney sections showed co-localization of KAL with renin. Expression of either REN or KLKB1 was regulated in cell line and rodent models of hypertension in response to oxidative stress, interleukin or arterial blood pressure changes.
   Conclusions: The functional variants of KLKB1 (rs3733402) and F12 (rs1801020) disrupted the cascade of enzymatic events, resulting in diminished formation of active renin. Using genetic, cellular and molecular approaches we found that conversion of zymogen prorenin to renin was influenced by these polymorphisms. The study suggests that the variant version of protease factor XIIa due to the amino acid substitution had reduced ability to activate prekallikrein to KAL. As a result KAL has reduced efficacy in converting prorenin to renin and this step of the pathway leading to activation of renin affords a potential therapeutic target.
OI Nievergelt, Caroline/0000-0001-5766-8923
TC 8
Z9 8
SN 1471-2350
PD MAR 11
PY 2016
VL 17
AR 21
DI 10.1186/s12881-016-0283-5
SC Genetics & Heredity
UT WOS:000371974200002
PM 26969407
ER

PT J
AU Hamid, NKA
   Carmona-Antonanzas, G
   Monroig, O
   Tocher, DR
   Turchini, GM
   Donald, JA
AF Hamid, Noor Khalidah Abdul
   Carmona-Antonanzas, Greta
   Monroig, Oscar
   Tocher, Douglas R.
   Turchini, Giovanni M.
   Donald, John A.
TI Isolation and Functional Characterisation of a fads2 in Rainbow Trout
   (Oncorhynchus mykiss) with Delta 5 Desaturase Activity
SO PLOS ONE
DT Article
ID FATTY ACYL DESATURASE; FISH-OIL REPLACEMENT; SALMON SALMO-SALAR;
   NUTRITIONAL REGULATION; ATLANTIC SALMON; TELEOST FISH; DOCOSAHEXAENOIC
   ACID; PUFA BIOSYNTHESIS; MARINE VERTEBRATE; LINOLENIC ACID
AB Rainbow trout, Oncorhynchus mykiss, are intensively cultured globally. Understanding their requirement for long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids (LC-PUFA) and the biochemistry of the enzymes and biosynthetic pathways required for fatty acid synthesis is important and highly relevant in current aquaculture. Most gnathostome vertebrates have two fatty acid desaturase (fads) genes with known functions in LC-PUFA biosynthesis and termed fads1 and fads2. However, teleost fish have exclusively fads2 genes. In rainbow trout, a fads2 cDNA had been previously cloned and found to encode an enzyme with Delta 6 desaturase activity. In the present study, a second fads2 cDNA was cloned from the liver of rainbow trout and termed fads2b. The full-length mRNA contained 1578 nucleotides with an open reading frame of 1365 nucleotides that encoded a 454 amino acid protein with a predicted molecular weight of 52.48 kDa. The predicted Fads2b protein had the characteristic traits of the microsomal Fads family, including an N-terminal cytochrome b5 domain containing the heme-binding motif (HPPG), histidine boxes (HDXGH, HFQHH and QIEHH) and three transmembrane regions. The fads2b was expressed predominantly in the brain, liver, intestine and pyloric caeca. Expression of the fasd2b in yeast generated a protein that was found to specifically convert eicosatetraenoic acid (20:4n-3) to eicosapentaenoic acid (20:5n-3), and therefore functioned as Delta 5 desaturase. Therefore, rainbow trout have two fads2 genes that encode proteins with Delta 5 and Delta 6 desaturase activities, respectively, which enable this species to perform all the desaturation steps required for the biosynthesis of LCPUFA from C-18 precursors.
RI Tocher, Douglas/C-5652-2011
OI Tocher, Douglas/0000-0002-8603-9410; Hamid, Noor/0000-0001-8833-3683;
   Turchini, Giovanni/0000-0003-0694-4283; Monroig,
   Oscar/0000-0001-8712-0440
TC 14
Z9 14
SN 1932-6203
PD MAR 4
PY 2016
VL 11
IS 3
AR e0150770
DI 10.1371/journal.pone.0150770
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000371739400047
PM 26943160
ER

PT J
AU Tian, R
   Wang, ZF
   Niu, X
   Zhou, KY
   Xu, SX
   Yang, G
AF Tian, Ran
   Wang, Zhengfei
   Niu, Xu
   Zhou, Kaiya
   Xu, Shixia
   Yang, Guang
TI Evolutionary Genetics of Hypoxia Tolerance in Cetaceans during Diving
SO GENOME BIOLOGY AND EVOLUTION
DT Article
DE Cetacean; hypoxia tolerance; positive selection; adaptive evolution
ID SECONDARY AQUATIC ADAPTATION; DETECTING POSITIVE SELECTION; AMINO-ACID
   SITES; ADAPTIVE EVOLUTION; HIGH-ALTITUDE; TURSIOPS-TRUNCATUS; MOLE-RAT;
   WHALES; MAMMALS; GENES
AB Hypoxia was a major challenge faced by cetaceans during the course of secondary aquatic adaptation. Although physiological traits of hypoxia tolerance in cetaceans have been well characterized, the underlying molecular mechanisms remain unknown. We investigated the sequences of 17 hypoxia-tolerance-related genes in representative cetaceans to provide a comprehensive insight into the genetic basis of hypoxia tolerance in these animals. Genes involved in carrying and transporting oxygen in the blood and muscle (hemoglobin-alpha and beta, myoglobin), and genes involved in the regulation of vasoconstriction (endothelin-1, -2, and -3; endothelin receptor type A and B; adrenergic receptor alpha-1D; and arginine vasopressin) appear to have undergone adaptive evolution, evidence for positive selection on their particular sites, and radical physiochemical property changes of selected condons. Interestingly, "long-diving" cetaceans had relatively higher omega (d(N)/d(S)) values than "short-diving" cetaceans for the hemoglobin beta gene, indicating divergent selective pressure presented in cetacean lineages with different diving abilities. Additionally, parallel positive selection or amino acid changes (ADRA1D: P50A, A53G, AVPR1B: I/V270T) among animals exposed to different hypoxia habitats reflect functional convergence or similar genetic mechanisms of hypoxia tolerance. In summary, positive selection, divergent selective pressures, and parallel evolution at the molecular level provided some new insights into the genetic adaptation of hypoxia tolerance.
TC 9
Z9 9
SN 1759-6653
PD MAR
PY 2016
VL 8
IS 3
BP 827
EP 839
DI 10.1093/gbe/evw037
SC Evolutionary Biology; Genetics & Heredity
UT WOS:000373839200029
PM 26912402
ER

PT J
AU Bae, MJ
   Chun, JH
   Chon, TS
   Park, YS
AF Bae, Mi-Jung
   Chun, Jung Hwa
   Chon, Tae-Soo
   Park, Young-Seuk
TI Spatio-Temporal Variability in Benthic Macroinvertebrate Communities in
   Headwater Streams in South Korea
SO WATER
DT Article
DE functional feeding guilds (FFGs); rarefaction; microhabitats;
   macroinvertebrate; headwater stream; non-metric multidimensional scaling
   (NMS); habit trait guilds (HTGs); heterogeneity
ID BIODIVERSITY CONSERVATION; HABITAT CHARACTERISTICS; SPECIES-RICHNESS;
   SEASONAL-CHANGES; LEAF-LITTER; DIVERSITY; ASSEMBLAGES; SCALES;
   INVERTEBRATES; VEGETATION
AB Comprehensive research on the structural and functional variability of benthic macroinvertebrate communities within headwater streams is limited, despite the fact that the majority of streams within a watershed are headwater streams that form the primary link between terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems. Therefore, we investigated the structure and function of benthic macroinvertebrate communities in four headwater streams at two different spatial scales (i.e., sampling sites (i.e., reaches) >samples (i.e., riffles)) over three seasons (i.e., spring, summer and autumn) of the year. Community indices, functional feeding guilds and habit trait guilds varied significantly depending on the seasons rather than on sites in two-way ANOVA based on spatial (i.e., sampling sites) and seasonal effects in each headwater stream. Non-metric multidimensional scaling analyses showed the differences between communities according to the considered spatial and temporal scales. At the individual stream scale, the differences between samples followed seasonal variation more than spatial differences. Site differences became more important when performing an ordination within a single season (i.e., spring, summer, and autumn). Continued research and monitoring employing both multidisciplinary and multidimensional approaches are required to maintain macroinvertebrate diversity within headwater streams.
TC 4
Z9 6
SN 2073-4441
PD MAR
PY 2016
VL 8
IS 3
AR 99
DI 10.3390/w8030099
SC Water Resources
UT WOS:000373691200013
ER

PT J
AU Ye, XQ
   Meng, JL
   Wu, M
   Shao, XX
   Li, CM
AF Ye, X. Q.
   Meng, J. L.
   Wu, M.
   Shao, X. X.
   Li, C. M.
TI Variations in allelopathic potential among plant species in coastal
   plant community
SO ALLELOPATHY JOURNAL
DT Article
DE Allelopathy; allelopathic potential; functional group; importance value;
   plant community; plant invasion; strength of inhibition
ID TRADE-OFF; GROWTH; SOIL
AB We determined the variations in allelopathic potential of plant species in 4-pioneer plant communities (Community Imperata cylindrica, Community Phragmites australis, Community Phacelurus latifolius and Community Solidago canadensis) in coastal area in Cixi City, China. The allelopathic potential of species was also compared among functional groups and linked with species dominance. The results showed that main variation in allelopathic potential existed among the species and functional groups. The strength of allelopathic inhibition differed in selected functional groups: annuals/biennials > perennial species, non-clonal species > clonal species and Poaceae < other families. In contrast, the ranking pattern of species mean importance values in different functional groups was reversed. When all species from the communities are pooled together, allelopathic potential was negatively related to the importance value. In conclusion, although the substantial variations in allelopathic potential of plant species exists, but the species dominance in this community was achieved through functional traits viz., clonality and perenniality instead of allelopathy. A trade-off likely exists between traits that promote the dominance and the traits that promote allelopathy.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0971-4693
EI 0974-1240
PD MAR
PY 2016
VL 37
IS 2
BP 221
EP 230
SC Agriculture
UT WOS:000372818800005
ER

PT J
AU Koutsidi, M
   Tzanatos, E
   Machias, A
   Vassilopoulou, V
AF Koutsidi, Martha
   Tzanatos, Evangelos
   Machias, Athanassios
   Vassilopoulou, Vassiliki
TI Fishing for function: the use of biological traits to evaluate the
   effects of multispecies fisheries on the functioning of fisheries
   assemblages
SO ICES JOURNAL OF MARINE SCIENCE
DT Article
DE biological traits analysis; ecosystem approach to fisheries management;
   fish assemblages; fishing effects; functional traits; multispecies
   fisheries
ID MEDITERRANEAN SEA; COMMUNITY STRUCTURE; INDUCED EVOLUTION; MARINE FISH;
   ECOSYSTEM; PERSPECTIVE; MANAGEMENT; METIERS; EUROPE; TRENDS
AB The Ecosystem Approach to Fisheries Management claims that fisheries management should take into account the ecosystem processes; in that context, it is useful to examine the functional traits of fisheries assemblages. This can be a challenge in multispecies fisheries. We used 21 biological traits of 86 species to investigate the relationship between-species and trait composition and to identify species with rare functional traits. Combining these traits with two catch datasets from the eastern Mediterranean (Patraikos Gulf: small-scale fleet, eastern Ionian Sea: entire multispecies fleet), we investigated whether certain fishing tactics or gears tend to remove specific traits, using multivariate methodologies. Species and traits composition of the catches were related, but an important part of trait variability was not explained by species composition. Rare traits and trait combinations were found for important target or bycatch species. Differences in the traits composition of fishing operations were revealed both between fishing tactics (Patraikos) as well as gears and areas (eastern Ionian); hierarchical clustering and MDS indicated the distinction of purse-seine catches at gear level. SIMPER analysis by trait indicated associations of certain trait categories mainly with purse-seines (at gear level) and longline metiers and a trammel-net metier (at metier level). The identification of rare traits or their combinations can have significant management implications as overfishing of the species with these traits could result in altering assemblage functioning. It seems that the multispecies character of the benthic fisheries results in a balanced trait removal, while management should regulate the effects of purse-seine fisheries on the fisheries assemblage functioning. Further investigation of the functions that fishing may remove from the ecosystem could contribute to understanding the effects of fishing and reveal overlooked aspects useful for the improvement of fisheries management.
RI Tzanatos, Evangelos/A-7693-2013
OI Tzanatos, Evangelos/0000-0001-9972-9632
TC 6
Z9 6
SN 1054-3139
EI 1095-9289
PD MAR-APR
PY 2016
VL 73
IS 4
BP 1091
EP 1103
DI 10.1093/icesjms/fsw006
SC Fisheries; Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000373233600010
ER

PT J
AU Bernal, MA
   Floeter, SR
   Gaither, MR
   Longo, GO
   Morais, R
   Ferreira, CEL
   Vermeij, MJA
   Rocha, LA
AF Bernal, Moises A.
   Floeter, Sergio R.
   Gaither, Michelle R.
   Longo, Guilherme O.
   Morais, Renato
   Ferreira, Carlos E. L.
   Vermeij, Mark J. A.
   Rocha, Luiz A.
TI High prevalence of dermal parasites among coral reef fishes of Cura
   double dagger ao
SO MARINE BIODIVERSITY
DT Article
DE Tropical Western Atlantic; Caribbean; Infectious diseases; Metacercaria;
   Turbellaria; Marine fishes
ID BIRD FINAL HOSTS; COMMUNITY STRUCTURE; NEW-CALEDONIA; ECTOPARASITES;
   DIVERSITY; ABUNDANCE; MONOGENEA; BEHAVIOR; HEALTHY; HABITAT
AB During expeditions to Cura double dagger ao in August and October of 2013, a large number of fish infected with dermal parasites was observed. Infected individuals presented black spots and white blemishes on their skin and fins that were easily observed by divers, and which have been associated with infections by trematodes, turbellarians, and protozoans (Cryptocaryon). In order to compare rates of infection across localities in the Caribbean, we conducted visual censuses of reef fish communities along 40 m(2) belt transects in Belize (n = 35), Cura double dagger ao (n = 82), and Mexico (n = 80) over a 4-week period. Three affected individuals were recorded in Belize, 75 in Cura double dagger ao, and none in Mexico. Approximately 68 % of the infected individuals in Cura double dagger ao were surgeonfishes (Acanthuridae). There was no correlation between incidence of infection and species abundance (r (2) = 0.03), or with functional traits (diet, mobility, schooling behavior, or position in the water column). The causes of the strikingly high incidence of dermal parasites in Cura double dagger ao and its consequences remain unknown. However, considering that parasites with complex life cycles have several hosts throughout their lives, and that past disease outbreaks have had severe consequences on communities of the Caribbean, we caution that coral reef ecosystems of Cura double dagger ao should be closely monitored.
RI Vermeij, Mark/B-2752-2013; Floeter, Sergio/B-1438-2012
OI Vermeij, Mark/0000-0001-9612-9527; Floeter, Sergio/0000-0002-3201-6504;
   Gaither, Michelle/0000-0002-0371-5621; Rocha, Luiz/0000-0003-4011-569X
TC 2
Z9 3
SN 1867-1616
EI 1867-1624
PD MAR
PY 2016
VL 46
IS 1
BP 67
EP 74
DI 10.1007/s12526-015-0322-z
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000373152300020
ER

PT J
AU Carus, J
   Paul, M
   Schroder, B
AF Carus, Jana
   Paul, Maike
   Schroeder, Boris
TI Vegetation as self-adaptive coastal protection: Reduction of current
   velocity and morphologic plasticity of a brackish marsh pioneer
SO ECOLOGY AND EVOLUTION
DT Article
DE Adaptive value; Bolboschoenus maritimus; brackish marsh; flow velocity;
   mechanical pressure; morphological adaptation; phenotypic plasticity;
   pioneer zone
ID MARITIMUS VAR-PALUDOSUS; SCIRPUS-MARITIMUS; SPARTINA-ALTERNIFLORA;
   SALT-MARSH; BOLBOSCHOENUS-MARITIMUS; PHRAGMITES-AUSTRALIS; HABITAT
   MODIFICATION; SEDIMENT TRANSPORT; MECHANICAL-STRESS; WAVE EXPOSURE
AB By reducing current velocity, tidal marsh vegetation can diminish storm surges and storm waves. Conversely, currents often exert high mechanical stresses onto the plants and hence affect vegetation structure and plant characteristics. In our study, we aim at analysing this interaction from both angles. On the one hand, we quantify the reduction of current velocity by Bolboschoenus maritimus, and on the other hand, we identify functional traits of B. maritimus' ramets along environmental gradients. Our results show that tidal marsh vegetation is able to buffer a large proportion of the flow velocity at currents under normal conditions. Cross-shore current velocity decreased with distance from the marsh edge and was reduced by more than 50% after 15 m of vegetation. We were furthermore able to show that plants growing at the marsh edge had a significantly larger diameter than plants from inside the vegetation. We found a positive correlation between plant thickness and cross-shore current which could provide an adaptive value in habitats with high mechanical stress. With the adapted morphology of plants growing at the highly exposed marsh edge, the entire vegetation belt is able to better resist the mechanical stress of high current velocities. This self-adaptive effect thus increases the ability of B. maritimus to grow and persist in the pioneer zone and may hence better contribute to ecosystem-based coastal protection by reducing current velocity.
RI Schroder, Boris/B-7211-2009
OI Schroder, Boris/0000-0002-8577-7980; Carus, Jana/0000-0001-7593-4586
TC 6
Z9 6
SN 2045-7758
PD MAR
PY 2016
VL 6
IS 6
BP 1579
EP 1589
DI 10.1002/ece3.1904
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000372488300001
PM 27087929
ER

PT J
AU Ohman, MD
   Romagnan, JB
AF Ohman, Mark D.
   Romagnan, Jean-Baptiste
TI Nonlinear effects of body size and optical attenuation on Diel Vertical
   Migration by zooplankton
SO LIMNOLOGY AND OCEANOGRAPHY
DT Article
ID CALIFORNIA CURRENT SYSTEM; CLIMATE-CHANGE; INTENSIFICATION; MICRONEKTON;
   COPEPODS; MODEL
AB We adopt a trait-based approach to explain Diel Vertical Migration (DVM) across a diverse assemblage of planktonic copepods, utilizing body size as a master trait. We find a reproducible pattern of body size-dependence of day and night depths occupied, and of DVM. Both the smallest surface-dwelling and the largest deeper-dwelling copepods refrain from migrations, while intermediate-sized individuals show pronounced DVM. This pattern apparently arises as a consequence of size-dependent predation risk. In the size classes of migratory copepods the amplitude of DVM is further modulated by optical attenuation in the ocean water column because increased turbidity decreases encounter rates with visually hunting predators. Long-term changes in the ocean optical environment are expected to alter the vertical distributions of many copepods and thus to affect predator-prey encounters as well as oceanic carbon export.
RI Biblio, LOV/K-9251-2017
OI Ohman, Mark D./0000-0001-8136-3695
TC 5
Z9 5
SN 0024-3590
EI 1939-5590
PD MAR
PY 2016
VL 61
IS 2
BP 765
EP 770
DI 10.1002/lno.10251
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000372166500020
ER

PT J
AU Dedieu, N
   Clavier, S
   Vigouroux, R
   Cerdan, P
   Cereghino, R
AF Dedieu, N.
   Clavier, S.
   Vigouroux, R.
   Cerdan, P.
   Cereghino, R.
TI A Multimetric Macroinvertebrate Index for the Implementation of the
   European Water Framework Directive in French Guiana, East Amazonia
SO RIVER RESEARCH AND APPLICATIONS
DT Article
DE anthropogenic perturbation; biological diversity; biomonitoring;
   neotropical rivers; reference conditions
ID FUNCTIONAL FEEDING GROUPS; BENTHIC MACROINVERTEBRATES; NEOTROPICAL
   STREAMS; AQUATIC MACROINVERTEBRATES; INVERTEBRATE COMMUNITIES;
   BIOLOGICAL CONDITION; CARIBBEAN ISLANDS; WADEABLE STREAMS; ATLANTIC
   FOREST; BRAZIL
AB Neotropical, overseas regions of Europe are subjected to the same water policy objectives as the continental ones but were overlooked during recent developments of bioindicators that fulfil the Water Framework Directive guidelines. We designed a macroinvertebrate-based multimetric index [Indice Biotique Macroinvertebres de Guyane (IBMG)] to assess ecological health in remote headwater-small streams of French Guiana, Europe's only overseas region of continental South America. Invertebrates were sampled at 95 sites including reference and impacted river reaches, following a standardized protocol. Among the 102 biological metrics calculated from site-specific data, we selected metrics exhibiting the best trade-off between high discrimination efficiency, low specificity, low redundancy and high stability under reference conditions. The IBMG is composed of two taxonomic richness-based metrics, two abundance-based metrics, one trait-related metric and a diversity index (Shannon's entropy). Each metric was weighted by its discrimination efficiency. Using a test data set, we found that the IBMG was sensitive to the range of disturbances in French Guiana. Finally, comparing the IBMG with other indices developed in other neotropical countries reveals that, for several reasons, multimetric indices developed in the neotropics may perform well in the context of the data sets used to generate them but would certainly fail to be robust when used elsewhere. Copyright (c) 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
OI Cereghino, Regis/0000-0003-3981-3159
TC 6
Z9 7
SN 1535-1459
EI 1535-1467
PD MAR
PY 2016
VL 32
IS 3
BP 501
EP 515
DI 10.1002/rra.2874
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Water Resources
UT WOS:000372354700026
ER

PT J
AU Davis, AM
   Unmack, PJ
   Vari, RP
   Betancur, R
AF Davis, Aaron M.
   Unmack, Peter J.
   Vari, Richard P.
   Betancur-R, Ricardo
TI Herbivory Promotes Dental Disparification and Macroevolutionary Dynamics
   in Grunters (Teleostei: Terapontidae), a Freshwater Adaptive Radiation
SO AMERICAN NATURALIST
DT Article
DE phenotypic disparification; herbivory; dentition; carnivory; trophic
   shifts
ID R PACKAGE; STABILIZING SELECTION; PHYLOGENETIC ANALYSES; PRINCIPAL
   COMPONENTS; EVOLUTIONARY RATES; CICHLID FISHES; DIVERSIFICATION; MARINE;
   MORPHOLOGY; PATTERNS
AB Trophic shifts into new adaptive zones have played major (although often conflicting) roles in reshaping the evolutionary trajectories of many lineages. We analyze data on diet, tooth, and oral morphology and relate these traits to phenotypic disparification and lineage diversification rates across the ecologically diverse Terapontidae, a family of Australasian fishes. In contrast to carnivores and most omnivores, which have retained relatively simple, ancestral caniniform tooth shapes, herbivorous terapontids appear to have evolved a variety of novel tooth shapes at significantly faster rates to meet the demands of plant-based diets. The evolution of herbivory prompted major disparification, significantly expanding the terapontid adaptive phenotypic continuum into an entirely novel functional morphospace. There was minimal support for our hypothesis of faster overall rates of integrated tooth shape, spacing, and jaw biomechanical evolution in herbivorous terapontids in their entirety, compared with other trophic strategies. There was, however, considerable support for accelerated disparification within a diverse freshwater clade containing a range of specialized freshwater herbivores. While the evolutionary transition to herbivorous diets has played a central role in terapontid phenotypic diversification by pushing herbivores toward novel fitness peaks, there was little support for herbivory driving significantly higher lineage diversification compared with background rates across the family.
OI Unmack, Peter/0000-0003-1175-1152
TC 7
Z9 7
SN 0003-0147
EI 1537-5323
PD MAR
PY 2016
VL 187
IS 3
BP 320
EP 333
DI 10.1086/684747
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000370955700006
PM 26913945
ER

PT J
AU Vorste, RV
   Corti, R
   Sagouis, A
   Datry, T
AF Vorste, R. Vander
   Corti, R.
   Sagouis, A.
   Datry, T.
TI Invertebrate communities in gravel-bed, braided rivers are highly
   resilient to flow intermittence
SO FRESHWATER SCIENCE
DT Article
DE resistance; resilience; recovery; co-tolerance; hyporheic zone; alluvial
   rivers; BACI design
ID HYPORHEIC ZONE; MACROINVERTEBRATE ASSEMBLAGES; MULTIPLE STRESSORS;
   HEADWATER STREAMS; BENTHIC MACROINVERTEBRATE; LONGITUDINAL PATTERNS;
   FUNCTIONAL REDUNDANCY; PERENNIAL STREAMS; TAGLIAMENTO RIVER; NEW-ZEALAND
AB In naturally disturbed systems, harsh environmental conditions act as filters on the regional species pool, restricting the number of taxa able to form a local community to those with traits promoting resistance or resilience. Thus, communities in highly disturbed ecosystems may be less sensitive to a given disturbance than those in less disturbed ecosystems. We explored this idea by examining the response of aquatic invertebrate communities to flow intermittence in gravel-bed, braided rivers (BRs). Flow intermittence is considered a major driver of communities in rivers, but its influence on communities in BRs, which are recognized as naturally highly disturbed environments, is relatively unexplored. We used a multisite Before-After-Control-Impact (BACI) design to quantify the effects of drying events of different durations (moderate: 2-3 wk, severe: 1-3 mo) on invertebrate communities in 8 BRs in southeastern France. As predicted, no effects of flow intermittence were detected 1 to 4 mo after flow resumption on taxonomic richness, composition, or functional diversity of communities facing moderate drying events. Communities subjected to severe drying events were similar to those in perennial reaches as few as 19 d after flow resumption. Moreover, communities showed functional redundancy and no loss of functional diversity after drying events. These results differ from those of studies in other river systems, where persistent effects of flow intermittence on communities generally have been found, and highlight the need for cross-system comparisons that explore the effects of drying on communities. Identifying the processes (e.g., niche selection, cotolerance) and habitat features (e.g., hyporheic zone refugia) that promote community resilience in BRs will advance our understanding of how anthropogenic stressors and climate change may affect communities in freshwater ecosystems.
RI Sagouis, Alban/J-3749-2013
OI Sagouis, Alban/0000-0002-3827-1063
TC 17
Z9 17
SN 2161-9549
EI 2161-9565
PD MAR
PY 2016
VL 35
IS 1
BP 164
EP 177
DI 10.1086/683274
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000370993800014
ER

PT J
AU Mindel, BL
   Webb, TJ
   Neat, FC
   Blanchard, JL
AF Mindel, Beth L.
   Webb, Thomas J.
   Neat, Francis C.
   Blanchard, Julia L.
TI A trait-based metric sheds new light on the nature of the body
   size-depth relationship in the deep sea
SO JOURNAL OF ANIMAL ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE bathymetry; deepwater fish; FishBase; functional role; L-max; ontogeny;
   Redundancy Analysis; trait-based analysis
ID FISH COMMUNITY INDICATORS; DEMERSAL FISH; SPECIES COMPOSITION;
   BATHYMETRIC TRENDS; CONTINENTAL-SLOPE; LIFE-HISTORIES; ECOSYSTEM;
   DIVERSITY; ECOLOGY; OCEAN
AB Variation within species is an often-overlooked aspect of community ecology, despite the fact that the ontogenetic structure of populations influences processes right up to the ecosystem level. Accounting for traits at the individual level is an important advance in the implementation of trait-based approaches in understanding community structure and function.
   We incorporate individual- and species-level traits into one succinct assemblage structure metric, fractional size, which is calculated as the length of an individual divided by its potential maximum length. We test the implementation of fractional size in demersal fish assemblages along a depth gradient in the deep sea. We use data from an extensive trawl survey at depths of 300-2030m on the continental slope of the Rockall Trough, Northeast Atlantic, to compare changes in fractional size structure along an environmental gradient to those seen using traditional taxonomic and trait-based approaches.
   The relationship between fractional size and depth was particularly strong, with the overall pattern being an increase with depth, implying that individuals move deeper as they grow. Body size increased with depth at the intraspecific and assemblage levels. Fractional size, size structure and species composition all varied among assemblages, and this variation could be explained by the depth that the assemblage occupied.
   The inclusion of individual-level traits and population fractional size structure adds to our understanding at the assemblage level. Fractional size, or where an individual is in its growth trajectory, appears to be an especially important driver of assemblage change with depth. This has implications for understanding fisheries impacts in the deep sea and how these impacts may propagate across depths.
OI Mindel, Beth/0000-0002-8383-0565; Blanchard, Julia/0000-0003-0532-4824;
   Webb, Tom/0000-0003-3183-8116
TC 9
Z9 9
SN 0021-8790
EI 1365-2656
PD MAR
PY 2016
VL 85
IS 2
BP 427
EP 436
DI 10.1111/1365-2656.12471
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Zoology
UT WOS:000370959300012
PM 26559778
ER

PT J
AU Treurnicht, M
   Pagel, J
   Esler, KJ
   Schutte-Vlok, A
   Nottebrock, H
   Kraaij, T
   Rebelo, AG
   Schurr, FM
AF Treurnicht, Martina
   Pagel, Joern
   Esler, Karen J.
   Schutte-Vlok, AnneLise
   Nottebrock, Henning
   Kraaij, Tineke
   Rebelo, Anthony G.
   Schurr, Frank M.
TI Environmental drivers of demographic variation across the global
   geographical range of 26 plant species
SO JOURNAL OF ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE biogeography; climate; density dependence; edaphic factors; fire
   disturbance; fire mortality; lifetime fecundity; plant population and
   community dynamics; population biology; recruitment
ID CAPE FLORISTIC REGION; EASTERN COASTAL FYNBOS; CANOPY SEED STORAGE;
   SOUTH-AFRICA; CLIMATE-CHANGE; FUNCTIONAL TRAITS; WOODY-PLANTS;
   VITAL-RATES; FIRE; DISTRIBUTIONS
AB Understanding how rates of reproduction and survival respond to environmental variation across species' geographical ranges is a key task for both basic and applied ecology. So far, however, environmental drivers of range-wide demographic variation have only been studied in a few plant species without considering the potentially confounding effects of population density on demographic rates. We present a large-scale demographic study of 26 shrub species (Proteaceae) from the Cape Floristic Region. All study species have a fire-dependent life cycle and are serotinous: they exclusively form a canopy seed bank which contains the seeds produced since the last fire. Fire triggers seed release from the canopy so that recruitment is largely limited to a short period after fire. Across the global geographical ranges of the study species, we collected 3454 population-level records of total fecundity since the last fire (size of individual canopy seed banks), per-capita recruitment (ratio between post-fire recruits and pre-fire adults) and adult fire survival. We used linear regressions to quantify how climate, population density, fire interval and soil nutrients affect demographic variation. A trade-off between survival and reproduction is evident throughout the geographical ranges of our study species: resprouting species with fire-protected buds had much higher fire survival than nonsprouters without fire-protected buds (97% vs. 2%) but they also had substantially lower fecundity and recruitment rates. We found little intraspecific variation in fire survival rates but considerable intraspecific variation in fecundity and recruitment. Range-wide variation in fecundity was dominated by fire interval whereas recruitment was mostly climate-driven. Population density and soil nutrients generally had smaller effects but were important for the fecundity and recruitment of several species. Effects of fire interval on fecundity were consistent across species, but other demography-environment relationships showed substantial interspecific differentiation.Synthesis. This study extends demographic research beyond the population to cover the geographical ranges of multiple species. Such large-scale studies are a necessary first step of a research agenda that aims to understand how range dynamics emerge from first principles of demography, how they are shaped by functional traits and macroevolution and how they will be impacted by global change.
OI Kraaij, Tineke/0000-0002-8891-2869
TC 9
Z9 11
SN 0022-0477
EI 1365-2745
PD MAR
PY 2016
VL 104
IS 2
BP 331
EP 342
DI 10.1111/1365-2745.12508
SC Plant Sciences; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000370959800006
ER

PT J
AU Barcelo, C
   Ciannelli, L
   Olsen, EM
   Johannessen, T
   Knutsen, H
AF Barcelo, Caren
   Ciannelli, Lorenzo
   Olsen, Esben M.
   Johannessen, Tore
   Knutsen, Halvor
TI Eight decades of sampling reveal a contemporary novel fish assemblage in
   coastal nursery habitats
SO GLOBAL CHANGE BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE climate change; community structure; juvenile fish; Norwegian Skagerrak
   coast; novel assemblage
ID TRAITS-ENVIRONMENT RELATIONSHIPS; NORWEGIAN SKAGERRAK COAST;
   CLIMATE-CHANGE IMPACTS; NO-ANALOG COMMUNITIES; NORTH-SEA FISHES;
   4TH-CORNER PROBLEM; MARINE ECOSYSTEMS; FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; TEMPORAL
   DYNAMICS; RANGE SHIFTS
AB In order to adequately monitor biodiversity trends through time and their responses to natural or anthropogenic impacts, researchers require long time series that are often unavailable. This general lack of datasets that are several decades or longer makes establishing a background or baseline of diversity metrics difficult - especially when attempting to understand species composition changes against a backdrop of climate and ecological variability. Here, we present an analysis of a community of juvenile nearshore fishes based on nearly 8 decades of highly standardized Norwegian survey records. Using multivariate statistical techniques, we: (i) characterize the change in taxonomic community composition through time, (ii) determine whether there has been an increase in warm-water affinity species relative to their cold water affinity counterparts, and (iii) characterize the temporal change in the species' functional trait assemblage. Our results strongly indicate a shift toward a novel fish assemblage between the late 1990s and 2000s. The context of changes within the most recent two decades is in stark contrast to those during the 1960s and 1970s, but similar to those during the previous warm period during the 1930s and 1940s. This novel assemblage is tightly linked to the warming temperatures in the region portrayed by the increased presence of warm-water species and a higher incidence of pelagic, planktivorous species. The results indicate a clear influence of ocean temperature on the region's juvenile fish community that points to climate-mediated effects on the species assemblages of an important fish nursery area.
RI Olsen, Esben/B-1894-2012; Knutsen, Halvor/A-4261-2009
OI Olsen, Esben/0000-0003-3807-7524; Knutsen, Halvor/0000-0002-7627-7634
TC 16
Z9 16
SN 1354-1013
EI 1365-2486
PD MAR
PY 2016
VL 22
IS 3
BP 1155
EP 1167
DI 10.1111/gcb.13047
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000370491400017
PM 26238690
ER

PT J
AU Thomas, Y
   Pouvreau, S
   Alunno-Bruscia, M
   Barille, L
   Gohin, F
   Bryere, P
   Gernez, P
AF Thomas, Yoann
   Pouvreau, Stephane
   Alunno-Bruscia, Marianne
   Barille, Laurent
   Gohin, Francis
   Bryere, Philippe
   Gernez, Pierre
TI Global change and climate-driven invasion of the Pacific oyster
   (Crassostrea gigas) along European coasts: a bioenergetics modelling
   approach
SO JOURNAL OF BIOGEOGRAPHY
DT Article
DE biogeographical range expansion; Crassostrea gigas; DEB model; European
   coasts; functional traits; global change; individual-based model;
   invasive species; remote-sensing
ID DYNAMIC ENERGY BUDGET; SUSPENDED PARTICULATE MATTER; SEA-SURFACE
   TEMPERATURE; ENGLISH-CHANNEL; CHLOROPHYLL-A; WADDEN SEA; IN-SITU;
   SATELLITE; GROWTH; OCEAN
AB AimThe spread of non-indigenous species in marine ecosystems world-wide is one of today's most serious environmental concerns. Using mechanistic modelling, we investigated how global change relates to the invasion of European coasts by a non-native marine invertebrate, the Pacific oyster Crassostrea gigas.
   LocationBourgneuf Bay on the French Atlantic coast was considered as the northern boundary of C.gigas expansion at the time of its introduction to Europe in the 1970s. From this latitudinal reference, variations in the spatial distribution of the C.gigas reproductive niche were analysed along the north-western European coast from Gibraltar to Norway.
   MethodsThe effects of environmental variations on C.gigas physiology and phenology were studied using a bioenergetics model based on Dynamic Energy Budget theory. The model was forced with environmental time series including insitu phytoplankton data, and satellite data of sea surface temperature and suspended particulate matter concentration.
   ResultsSimulation outputs were successfully validated against insitu oyster growth data. In Bourgneuf Bay, the rise in seawater temperature and phytoplankton concentration has increased C.gigas reproductive effort and led to precocious spawning periods since the 1960s. At the European scale, seawater temperature increase caused a drastic northward shift (1400km within 30years) in the C.gigas reproductive niche and optimal thermal conditions for early life stage development.
   Main conclusionsWe demonstrated that the poleward expansion of the invasive species C.gigas is related to global warming and increase in phytoplankton abundance. The combination of mechanistic bioenergetics modelling with insitu and satellite environmental data is a valuable framework for ecosystem studies. It offers a generic approach to analyse historical geographical shifts and to predict the biogeographical changes expected to occur in a climate-changing world.
RI Thomas, Yoann/G-6648-2016
OI Thomas, Yoann/0000-0001-7980-5239; Alunno-Bruscia,
   Marianne/0000-0003-4968-723X; Pouvreau, Stephane/0000-0003-2402-7366;
   Barille, Laurent/0000-0001-5138-2684
TC 24
Z9 24
SN 0305-0270
EI 1365-2699
PD MAR
PY 2016
VL 43
IS 3
BP 568
EP 579
DI 10.1111/jbi.12665
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Physical Geography
UT WOS:000370450900013
ER

PT J
AU Bocksberger, G
   Schnitzler, J
   Chatelain, C
   Daget, P
   Janssen, T
   Schmidt, M
   Thiombiano, A
   Zizka, G
AF Bocksberger, Gaelle
   Schnitzler, Jan
   Chatelain, Cyrille
   Daget, Philippe
   Janssen, Thomas
   Schmidt, Marco
   Thiombiano, Adjima
   Zizka, Georg
TI Climate and the distribution of grasses in West Africa
SO JOURNAL OF VEGETATION SCIENCE
DT Article
DE Andropogoneae; Chloridoideae; Maxent; Paniceae; Poaceae; Savanna;
   Species distribution modelling; species richness; West Africa
ID SPECIES DISTRIBUTION MODELS; C-4 GRASSES; PHOTOSYNTHETIC PATHWAYS;
   TROPICAL SAVANNAS; NORTH-AMERICA; VEGETATION; SOUTH; PREDICTION;
   DETERMINANTS; PERFORMANCE
AB QuestionsWhich environmental variables influence grass diversity in West Africa? What are the effects of climate and grass functional traits on the spatial patterns (richness and abundance) of the grass clades Andropogoneae, Paniceae and Chloridoideae?
   LocationWest Africa, demarcated by the Atlantic Ocean in the west and south (20 degrees W and 4 degrees N), the Sahara desert in the north (25 degrees N) and the border between Niger and Chad in the east (20 degrees E).
   MethodsBased on 38912 georeferenced occurrence records, we modelled the distribution of 302 grass species (51% of West African grass diversity). We integrated species richness, abundance and functional traits (life cycle, photosynthetic type and height) to determine the contribution of the most speciose grass clades (Andropogoneae, Paniceae and Chloridoideae) to overall grass diversity in West Africa.
   ResultsPrecipitation is the variable most often influencing the species distribution models of grasses in West Africa. Richness and relative abundance of the tribe Andropogoneae show a centre of diversity in Sudanian savanna regions. The height of Andropogoneae species, generally >150cm, is driving this ecological dominance. Species richness of the tribe Paniceae is more dispersed and shows two main centres of abundance: The southern regions with higher mean annual precipitation and tree density are dominated by C-3 Paniceae species. The Sahelian regions in the north are dominated by short Paniceae species with theC(4) NAD-ME photosynthetic subtype, as well as Chloridoideae possessing thesame functional attributes.
   ConclusionsOur study provides insight into the environmental correlates of grass species richness in West Africa and contributes to the much-needed research on tropical rangelands. Moreover, the integration of evolutionary history significantly improves our understanding of large-scale biodiversity patterns.
OI Schmidt, Marco/0000-0001-6087-6117; Bocksberger,
   Gaelle/0000-0002-3399-0405
TC 9
Z9 9
SN 1100-9233
EI 1654-1103
PD MAR
PY 2016
VL 27
IS 2
BP 306
EP 317
DI 10.1111/jvs.12360
SC Plant Sciences; Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Forestry
UT WOS:000370621500011
ER

PT J
AU Mitwally, HM
   Fleeger, JW
AF Mitwally, Hanan M.
   Fleeger, John W.
TI A test of biological trait analysis with nematodes and an anthropogenic
   stressor
SO ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING AND ASSESSMENT
DT Article
DE Functional groups; Salt marsh; Nutrient enrichment; Environmental
   monitoring
ID TERM NUTRIENT ENRICHMENT; DEEP-SEA SITE; SALT-MARSH; FUNCTIONAL
   DIVERSITY; ANALYSIS BTA; NORTH-SEA; COASTAL EUTROPHICATION; ECOSYSTEM
   FUNCTION; QUALITY ASSESSMENT; MATURITY INDEX
AB Aquatic ecosystems are fundamentally altered by nutrient enrichment, and effective monitoring tools are needed to detect biological responses especially in the early stages of eutrophication. We tested the utility of biological trait analysis (BTA) to quantify the temporal responses of nematodes inhabiting salt marsh creeks that were experimentally enriched with nutrients for 6 years. Feeding, body shape, and tail shape traits were characterized on >6000 nematodes from annual samples from enriched and non-enriched sites. Here, we ask if trait combinations are more effective than single traits in detecting the magnitude and rate of change. We also sought to identify combinations of traits that best distinguish natural from nutrient-induced variation. BTA revealed that feeding, body shape, and all traits combined equally detected the response to nutrient enrichment. Compared to single traits however, BTAs were more sensitive to temporal trends and better distinguished natural variation from the response to nutrient enrichment. Tail shape traits (that might respond to altered sediment texture or geochemistry) were not affected by enrichment, and feeding traits yielded the greatest difference between enriched and reference communities indicating that changes in food resources drove responses. Feeding traits provided the highest quality information content in our study, and the use of feeding traits alone may adequately identify anthropogenic effects in many studies. However, we caution that body shape, tail shape, and feeding traits were strongly interrelated at our study site, and a diversity of trait groups may increase the information content of BTAs in more diverse habitats.
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 0167-6369
EI 1573-2959
PD MAR
PY 2016
VL 188
IS 3
AR 140
DI 10.1007/s10661-016-5128-3
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000369431000012
PM 26846290
ER

PT J
AU Carbonell, JA
   Millan, A
   Green, AJ
   Cespedes, V
   Coccia, C
   Velasco, J
AF Carbonell, J. A.
   Millan, A.
   Green, A. J.
   Cespedes, V.
   Coccia, C.
   Velasco, J.
TI What traits underpin the successful establishment and spread of the
   invasive water bug Trichocorixa verticalis verticalis?
SO HYDROBIOLOGIA
DT Article
DE Corixids; Trichocorixa; Sigara; Alien species; Expansion; Traits
ID POTAMOPYRGUS-ANTIPODARUM HYDROBIIDAE; BIOLOGICAL INVASIONS; THERMAL
   TOLERANCE; FLIGHT-MORPHOLOGY; HEMIPTERA; CORIXIDAE; HETEROPTERA;
   SALINITY; DISPERSAL; MOLLUSCA
AB The introduction of exotic species has a major impact on a wide range of ecosystems, especially in aquatic ecosystems. Trichocorixa v. verticalis (Fieber, 1851), an euryhaline aquatic hemipteran native North America, has occurred as an exotic species in the Iberian Peninsula since at least 1997. In this study, we compared several physiological and biological traits (salinity tolerance of the different developmental stages, thermal tolerance, fecundity, and dispersal ability) in the alien species and three native, syntopic corixidae species (Sigara lateralis, Sigara scripta, and Sigara selecta), to determine which traits may explain its invasion success. Trichocorixa verticalis was the species most resistant to high conductivity at the egg stage, while S. selecta showed the highest halotolerance as adults. The invader had the highest upper thermal limit and a much higher fecundity than Sigara species. Wing morphometry suggested that T. verticalis may be a stronger flier than the native species. Our findings provide an example of how functional and ecological niche interactions among alien and native species can help predict impacts of invasion on aquatic communities.
RI Green, Andy/A-5189-2008; Velasco, Josefa/K-3806-2017; Millan,
   Andres/D-3655-2009
OI Green, Andy/0000-0002-1268-4951; Velasco, Josefa/0000-0002-7457-0781;
   Millan, Andres/0000-0003-0036-363X; Coccia, Cristina/0000-0002-0832-2050
TC 6
Z9 6
SN 0018-8158
EI 1573-5117
PD MAR
PY 2016
VL 768
IS 1
BP 273
EP 286
DI 10.1007/s10750-015-2556-y
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000369001400019
ER

PT J
AU Colina, M
   Calliari, D
   Carballo, C
   Kruk, C
AF Colina, Maite
   Calliari, Danilo
   Carballo, Carmela
   Kruk, Carla
TI A trait-based approach to summarize zooplankton-phytoplankton
   interactions in freshwaters
SO HYDROBIOLOGIA
DT Article
DE Zooplankton; Phytoplankton; Trait-based functional responses; Functional
   traits
ID FUNCTIONAL-RESPONSES; COMMUNITY COMPOSITION; NUTRIENT LIMITATION; FOOD
   QUALITY; DAPHNIA; SIZE; CYANOBACTERIA; PLANKTON; INGESTION; MARINE
AB Assessing zooplankton grazing on phytoplankton is crucial to understand, model, and predict the structure and dynamics of pelagic communities. Our hypothesis is that phytoplankton consumption by zooplankton in freshwater lakes can be well represented by clustering phytoplankton species into morphology-based functional groups (MBFG) and zooplankton species into broad taxonomic units: cladocerans, calanoid copepods, and rotifers. We characterized zooplankton potential grazing on MBFG based on an extensive literature review of experimental data including clearance and ingestion rates. Rotifers show greater potential grazing upon small-and medium-sized species (MBFG I and IV) and presented a Type III trait-based functional response. Cladocerans also show greater potential impact upon MBFG IV but a Type II response. Both groups maintained their respective feeding response regardless of the type of food available, indicating poor food selectivity. Copepods consumed different MBFGs, but a clear Type II pattern was observed when feeding on MBFGs V and VI. Prediction intervals indicated a greater variability in cladocerans' and copepods' response. This approach is a step to summarize and characterize grazing to the future quantification of ecosystem models. Further efforts should be done to include information about different larval stages and phytoplankton traits not directly related to morphology.
TC 10
Z9 11
SN 0018-8158
EI 1573-5117
PD MAR
PY 2016
VL 767
IS 1
BP 221
EP 233
DI 10.1007/s10750-015-2503-y
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000369001000018
ER

PT J
AU Liu, G
   Gao, Y
   Huang, FF
   Yuan, MY
   Peng, SL
AF Liu, Gang
   Gao, Yang
   Huang, Fang-Fang
   Yuan, Ming-Yue
   Peng, Shao-Lin
TI The Invasion of Coastal Areas in South China by Ipomoea cairica May Be
   Accelerated by the Ecotype Being More Locally Adapted to Salt Stress
SO PLOS ONE
DT Article
ID PLANT PHENOTYPIC PLASTICITY; LEAF CONSTRUCTION COST; COMPETITIVE
   ABILITY; GENETIC DIVERSITY; CO2 ASSIMILATION; NITROGEN-CONTENT;
   ADAPTATION; EVOLUTION; SALINITY; ENVIRONMENTS
AB Local adaptation and phenotypic plasticity are two alternative mechanisms used by invasive plants for range expansion. We conducted a series of experiments to investigate the role of these mechanisms in the recent expansion of the invasive Ipomoea cairica from non-saline to salt-stressed coastal habitats. A comparison of the plant's photosynthetic traits and construction costs across habitats was conducted through a field survey. Meanwhile, a full factorial greenhouse experiment was conducted with two ecotypes (non-saline and coastal) of I. cairica and two salinity gradients (water and 4 g L-1 NaCl solution) to evaluate the roles of the two strategies by comparing their main traits. The results revealed that the construction cost and A(max) of I. cairica did not change with the habitat type. The ecotype and saline treatments, however, significantly influenced the plant growth. The non-saline ecotype (NE) generally showed higher or equal plasticity of biomass-allocation and functional traits compared to the coastal ecotype (CE). However, the fitness and biomass of the NE significantly decreased with salinity, whereas those aspects of the CE did not change. Our results indicate that the recent expansion of I. cairica into coastal areas may be accelerated by the local adaptation of the CE to salt stress. Additionally, in South China, the CE will most likely evolve adaptations to both saline and non-saline environments, which will further broaden the invasion range of I. cairica in the future.
TC 4
Z9 6
SN 1932-6203
PD FEB 11
PY 2016
VL 11
IS 2
AR e0149262
DI 10.1371/journal.pone.0149262
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000370050700082
PM 26867222
ER

PT J
AU Neumann, H
   Diekmann, R
   Kroncke, I
AF Neumann, Hermann
   Diekmann, Rabea
   Kroencke, Ingrid
TI Functional composition of epifauna in the south-eastern North Sea in
   relation to habitat characteristics and fishing effort
SO ESTUARINE COASTAL AND SHELF SCIENCE
DT Article
DE Ecosystem functioning; Functional composition; Environmental
   variability; Biological traits analysis; Benthos; MSFD
ID MARINE BENTHIC ECOSYSTEMS; PLEURONECTES-PLATESSA L.; BIOLOGICAL TRAITS;
   SPECIES TRAITS; DIVERSITY; COMMUNITIES; VARIABILITY; DISTURBANCE;
   MANAGEMENT; IMPACT
AB Analysis of ecosystem functioning is essential to describe the ecological status of ecosystems and is therefore directly requested in international directives. There is a lack of knowledge regarding functional aspects of benthic communities and their environmental and anthropogenic driving forces in the southern North Sea. This study linked functional composition of epibenthic communities to environmental conditions and fishing effort and investigated spatial correlations between habitat characteristics to gain insight into potential synergistic and/or cumulative effects. Functional composition of epifauna was assessed by using biological trait analysis (BTA), which considered 15 ecological traits of 54 species. Functional composition was related to ten predictor variables derived from sediment composition, bottom temperature and salinity, hydrodynamics, annual primary production and fishing effort. Our results revealed significantly different functional composition between the Dogger Bank, the Oyster Ground, the West and North Frisian coast. Mobility, feeding type, size and adult longevity were the most important traits differentiating the communities. A high proportion of trait modalities related to an opportunistic life mode were obvious in coastal areas especially at the West Frisian coast and in the area of the Frisian Front indicating disturbed communities. In contrast, functional composition in the Dogger Bank area indicated undisturbed communities with prevalence of large, long-lived and permanently attached species being sensitive towards disturbance such as fishing. Tidal stress, mud content of sediments, salinity, stratification and fishing effort were found to be the most important habitat characteristics shaping functional composition. Strong correlations were found between variables, especially between those which changed gradually from the coast to offshore areas including fishing effort. Unfavourable extremes of these factors in coastal areas resulted in disturbed epibenthic communities, while the relative influence of a single factor on functional composition cannot be quantified. Coastal communities seemed to be well adapted to disturbance and the prevalence of opportunistic trait modalities not necessarily revealed a poor ecological status according to the Marine Strategy Framework Directive (MSFD). The integration of functional aspects into the assessment of ecosystem health is recommended, since widely used structural measures failed in naturally disturbed habitats. (C) 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
TC 11
Z9 11
SN 0272-7714
EI 1096-0015
PD FEB 5
PY 2016
VL 169
BP 182
EP 194
DI 10.1016/j.ecss.2015.12.011
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000370884600019
ER

PT J
AU Alvarez, E
   Moran, XAG
   Lopez-Urrutia, A
   Nogueira, E
AF Alvarez, Eva
   Moran, Xose Anxelu G.
   Lopez-Urrutia, Angel
   Nogueira, Enrique
TI Size-dependent photoacclimation of the phytoplankton community in
   temperate shelf waters (southern Bay of Biscay)
SO MARINE ECOLOGY PROGRESS SERIES
DT Article
DE Phytoplankton; Hydrography; Chlorophyll: carbon ratio; Size spectra;
   Size scaling; Continental shelf; Cantabrian Sea
ID CENTRAL CANTABRIAN SEA; MARINE-PHYTOPLANKTON; EQUATORIAL PACIFIC;
   LIGHT-ABSORPTION; CHLOROPHYLL-A; CELL-SIZE; SEASONAL DYNAMICS;
   FUNCTIONAL TRAITS; SINGLE CELLS; GROWTH-RATE
AB Shelf waters of the Cantabrian Sea (southern Bay of Biscay) are productive ecosystems with a marked seasonality. We present the results from 1 yr of monthly monitoring of the phytoplankton community together with an intensive sampling carried out in 2 contrasting scenarios during the summer and autumn in a mid-shelf area. Stratification was apparent on the shelf in summer, while the water column was comparatively well mixed in autumn. The size structure of the photoautotrophic community, from pico-to micro-phytoplankton, was tightly coupled with the meteo-climatic and hydrographical conditions. Over the short term, variations in the size structure and chlorophyll content of phytoplankton cells were related to changes in the physico-chemical environment, through changes in the availability of nutrients and light. Uncoupling between the dynamics of carbon biomass and chlorophyll resulted in chlorophyll to carbon ratios dependent on body size. The slope of the size dependence of chlorophyll content increased with increasing irradiance, reflecting different photoacclimation plasticity from pico-to micro-phytoplankton. The results have important implications for the productivity and the fate of biogenic carbon in this region, since the size dependence of photosynthetic rates is directly related to the size scaling of chlorophyll content.
RI Moran, Xose Anxelu/K-9647-2014; Alvarez, Eva/C-3612-2018
OI Moran, Xose Anxelu/0000-0002-9823-5339; Alvarez, Eva/0000-0002-6776-1029
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 0171-8630
EI 1616-1599
PD FEB 3
PY 2016
VL 543
BP 73
EP 87
DI 10.3354/meps11580
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology;
   Oceanography
UT WOS:000370178100005
ER

PT J
AU Garbin, ML
   Guidoni-Martins, KG
   Hollunder, RK
   Mariotte, P
   Scarano, FR
   Carrijo, TT
AF Garbin, Mario L.
   Guidoni-Martins, Karlo G.
   Hollunder, Renan K.
   Mariotte, Pierre
   Scarano, Fabio R.
   Carrijo, Tatiana T.
TI Spatial segregation of subordinate species is not controlled by the
   dominant species in a tropical coastal plant community
SO PERSPECTIVES IN PLANT ECOLOGY EVOLUTION AND SYSTEMATICS
DT Article
DE Community assembly; Plant-plant interactions; Plant functional traits;
   Spatial pattern; Species coexistence; Subordinate species
ID ATLANTIC RAIN-FOREST; FUNCTIONAL TRAITS WORLDWIDE; SOUTHEASTERN BRAZIL;
   GRASSLAND COMMUNITIES; POSITIVE INTERACTIONS; SEED SIZE; DIVERSITY;
   FACILITATION; ECOLOGY; VEGETATION
AB Subordinate species composition and distribution are regarded as a result of the dominant species structure. However, the spatial organization of subordinate species can also be related to dispersal abilities and interactions (competition and facilitation) within subordinate species. Here, we tested the influence of dominant species on subordinate species and examined traits of subordinate species together with their spatial patterns within a tropical coastal plant community. We hypothesized that the identity of dominant species determines subordinate abundance, and dispersal and persistence trait values variation, within coexisting subordinate species. Moreover, we expected that functionally similar subordinate species aggregate in space, regarding these values. We used the relative abundance of shrubs and trees from 83 vegetation patches in 2 ha of Restinga vegetation in southeastern Brazil. We determined trait value dissimilarities between dominant and subordinate species and within subordinates, and tested for the effect of the dominant species on subordinate abundance and trait values variation. Spatial cross-correlation functions were estimated for the four most abundant subordinate species with spline and Moran's I cross-correlograms. Our results showed that dominant and subordinate species exhibit contrasted trait values for dispersal and persistence. However, the composition of subordinate species in patches and the variation in their functional traits were not controlled by the identity of dominant species. Surprisingly, subordinate species segregated in space. Spatial segregation was related to dissimilar trait values within subordinates. However, the identity of dominants and patch size had no control over subordinates' abundance. We suggest that such spatial segregation can result from competitive interactions. Dissimilar functional trait values within subordinate species seem to explain the spatial segregation of these species, principally led by differences in seed production and potential allelopathic interactions (e.g. Myrtaceae species). Therefore, independently of the identity of dominant species, subordinate species have a direct effect on the community composition of the Restinga vegetation. Together, our findings considerably increase knowledge on subordinate species in tropical plant communities and provide new insight into the potential role of subordinate species in community assembly. (C) 2015 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.
RI Scarano, Fabio/F-6620-2012; Mariotte, Pierre/G-4798-2011
OI Scarano, Fabio/0000-0003-3355-9882; Mariotte,
   Pierre/0000-0001-8570-8742; Guidoni Martins, Karlo
   Gregorio/0000-0002-8458-8467; Garbin, Mario/0000-0003-4137-2102
TC 5
Z9 5
SN 1433-8319
PD FEB
PY 2016
VL 18
BP 23
EP 32
DI 10.1016/j.ppees.2015.12.002
SC Plant Sciences; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000384272600003
ER

PT J
AU Avila-Poveda, OH
   Koueta, N
   Benitez-Villalobos, F
   Santos-Valencia, J
   Rosas, C
AF Avila-Poveda, Omar Hernando
   Koueta, Noussithe
   Benitez-Villalobos, Francisco
   Santos-Valencia, Josefina
   Rosas, Carlos
TI Reproductive traits of Octopus maya (Cephalopoda: Octopoda) with
   implications for fisheries management
SO MOLLUSCAN RESEARCH
DT Article
DE First 'onset of' sexual maturity; functional maturation; functional
   maturity; maturity index; octopus; physiological maturation;
   physiological maturity; reproductive cycle; reproductive indices; size
   at sexual maturity
ID GAMETOGENIC CYCLE; ELEDONE-CIRRHOSA; COMMON OCTOPUS; COASTAL ZONE;
   VULGARIS; YUCATAN; BIOLOGY; ECHINODERMATA; MATURITY; ATLANTIC
AB Octopus maya is the main species caught in Mexico. From September 2007 to June 2008, its sex ratio, reproductive season, frequency of non-vitellogenic and vitellogenic oocytes, reproductive indices, and size and weight at maturity, were evaluated. The monthly sex ratio was significantly different from 1:1. The major reproductive season occurs during February to June (dry season) in Yucatan. May-June is the common reproductive season to both Yucatan and Campeche populations. Higher frequencies of vitellogenic oocytes (> 50%) were found from January-March and in May. From five reproductive indices, only the macroscopic and microscopic maturity indices were the best descriptors of the reproductive season in females, whilst only the reproductive complex index was the best descriptor in males. The weight at sexual maturity (BW50%) was 335 g for females and 242 g for males. The size at sexual maturity (DML50%) was 12.58 cm for females and 7.42 cm for males. It is recommend revising the minimum catch size by following these results. The reproductive traits here evaluated could contribute to the recently created Plan for Management of Octopus Fisheries, in particular action line no. 1.4, which refers to protection of females during breeding, and to their protection throughout the entire reproductive season.
RI AVILA-POVEDA, OMAR HERNANDO/B-7533-2012
OI AVILA-POVEDA, OMAR HERNANDO/0000-0002-4411-0602; Rosas,
   Carlos/0000-0002-1301-7368
TC 8
Z9 8
SN 1323-5818
EI 1448-6067
PD FEB
PY 2016
VL 36
IS 1
BP 29
EP 44
DI 10.1080/13235818.2015.1072912
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Zoology
UT WOS:000374052600004
ER

PT J
AU Pascual, M
   Minana, EP
   Giacomello, E
AF Pascual, Marta
   Minana, Elena Perez
   Giacomello, Eva
TI Integrating knowledge on biodiversity and ecosystem services:
   Mind-mapping and Bayesian Network modelling
SO ECOSYSTEM SERVICES
DT Article
DE Biodiversity; Ecosystem services; Ecosystem function; Human well-being;
   Bayesian Network modelling; Mind-map
ID MARINE BIODIVERSITY; LINKING BIODIVERSITY; ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION;
   PSYCHOLOGICAL BENEFITS; RESOURCE-MANAGEMENT; FUNCTIONAL TRAITS; SPECIES
   RICHNESS; LAND-USE; DIVERSITY; CONSERVATION
AB Even-though the last years have seen a "blossoming" of initiatives aiming to clarify the link between biodiversity (BD)-ecosystem functions (EF)-ecosystem services (ES)-human well-being (HWB), there is still a need for integrating the knowledge obtained by various research, making it useful for decision makers. This contribution aims to show ways of gathering, representing and modelling these linkages to enable better decision-making based on available knowledge. This is achieved by: (i) conducting a systematic -review of contributions describing the links between BD-EF-ES-HWB and gathering the information into a database; (ii) organizing that information in a mind-map; (iii) showing, as an example, how a Bayesian Network model and scenarios can be built using the mind-map and database information. We show how gathering information into mind-maps works as a first step to the creation of a unified knowledge base, while Bayesian Network models allow for a better management of data uncertainty, commonly associated with the representation of complex models, as well as providing the possibility of creating future scenarios where assumptions can be tested. Thus, this contribution shows how available knowledge can be linked to improve our understanding of complex issues. (C) 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
OI Giacomello, Eva/0000-0003-0458-486X
TC 12
Z9 13
SN 2212-0416
PD FEB
PY 2016
VL 17
BP 112
EP 122
DI 10.1016/j.ecoser.2015.12.004
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000370641300014
ER

PT J
AU Grabowski, RC
   Gurnell, AM
AF Grabowski, R. C.
   Gurnell, A. M.
TI Hydrogeomorphology-Ecology Interactions in River Systems
SO RIVER RESEARCH AND APPLICATIONS
DT Article
DE hydrogeomorphology; biogeomorphology; riparian vegetation; aquatic
   vegetation; fish
AB The European Union-funded REFORM (REstoring rivers FOR effective catchment Management) project has developed guidance and tools aimed at making river restoration and mitigation measures more effective. A major component of this work has been to investigate functional linkages between the hydrogeomorphology and ecology of rivers. This special collection presents some of the outputs from this work concerning interactions between hydrological, geomorphological and ecological processes in naturally functioning river systems. Together, this set of five papers reviews some of the existing knowledge on interactions and feedbacks between hydrogeomorphology and ecology in river systems and outlines how hydrogeomorphological processes, ecological processes and plant traits contribute to driving river corridor dynamics that create and sustain a diversity of aquatic and wetland habitats that support fish communities.
OI Grabowski, Robert/0000-0002-0926-1202
TC 7
Z9 7
SN 1535-1459
EI 1535-1467
PD FEB
PY 2016
VL 32
IS 2
SI SI
BP 139
EP 141
DI 10.1002/rra.2974
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Water Resources
UT WOS:000369979000001
ER

PT J
AU Bracciali, C
   Guzzo, G
   Giacoma, C
   Dean, JM
   Sara, G
AF Bracciali, C.
   Guzzo, G.
   Giacoma, C.
   Dean, J. M.
   Sara, G.
TI Fish functional traits are affected by hydrodynamics at small spatial
   scale
SO MARINE ENVIRONMENTAL RESEARCH
DT Article
DE Mediterranean damselfish; Morphometry; Body condition state; Growth;
   Hydrodynamic variability; Egadi marine protected area; Mediterranean Sea
ID DAMSELFISH CHROMIS-CHROMIS; LENGTH-WEIGHT; FRESH-WATER; AEGEAN SEA;
   SIZE; POPULATIONS; SETTLEMENT; GROWTH; MODEL; ECOMORPHOLOGY
AB The Mediterranean damselfish Chromis chromis is a species with a broad distribution found both in the Mediterranean Sea and Eastern Atlantic as far south as the coast of Angola. We hypothesized that the species may have significant functional morphological plasticity to adapt along a gradient of environmental conditions. It is a non-migratory zooplanktivorous species and spends the daytime searching for food in the middle of the water column. Therefore, local hydrodynamics could be one of the environmental factors affecting traits of C. chromis with repercussions at the population level. We compared the body condition, individual growth and body shapes of damselfish collected under two different hydrodynamic conditions (low similar to 10 cm s(-1) vs. high similar to 20 cm s(-1)). Specimens showed higher body condition under high-hydrodynamics, where conditions offered greater amounts of food, which were able to support larger individuals. Individuals smaller than 60-mm were more abundant under low hydrodynamics. Morphometric analysis revealed that high-hydrodynamics were favored by fish with a more fusiform body shape and body traits developed for propellant swimming. (C) 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
OI GIACOMA, Cristina/0000-0002-8429-7723
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 0141-1136
EI 1879-0291
PD FEB
PY 2016
VL 113
BP 116
EP 123
DI 10.1016/j.marenvres.2015.12.002
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology;
   Toxicology
UT WOS:000368951800014
PM 26707883
ER

PT J
AU Patin, NV
   Duncan, KR
   Dorrestein, PC
   Jensen, PR
AF Patin, Nastassia V.
   Duncan, Katherine R.
   Dorrestein, Pieter C.
   Jensen, Paul R.
TI Competitive strategies differentiate closely related species of marine
   actinobacteria
SO ISME JOURNAL
DT Article
ID ACTINOMYCETE GENUS SALINISPORA; ANTAGONISTIC INTERACTIONS;
   MICROBIAL-POPULATIONS; BACTERIAL DIVERSITY; COMMUNITY STRUCTURE; PELAGIC
   BACTERIA; OCEAN SEDIMENTS; DEEP-SEA; SP NOV.; EVOLUTION
AB Although competition, niche partitioning, and spatial isolation have been used to describe the ecology and evolution of macro-organisms, it is less clear to what extent these principles account for the extraordinary levels of bacterial diversity observed in nature. Ecological interactions among bacteria are particularly challenging to address due to methodological limitations and uncertainties over how to recognize fundamental units of diversity and link them to the functional traits and evolutionary processes that led to their divergence. Here we show that two closely related marine actinomycete species can be differentiated based on competitive strategies. Using a direct challenge assay to investigate inhibitory interactions with members of the bacterial community, we observed a temporal difference in the onset of inhibition. The majority of inhibitory activity exhibited by Salinispora arenicola occurred early in its growth cycle and was linked to antibiotic production. In contrast, most inhibition by Salinispora tropica occurred later in the growth cycle and was more commonly linked to nutrient depletion or other sources. Comparative genomics support these differences, with S. arenicola containing nearly twice the number of secondary metabolite biosynthetic gene clusters as S. tropica, indicating a greater potential for secondary metabolite production. In contrast, S. tropica is enriched in gene clusters associated with the acquisition of growth-limiting nutrients such as iron. Coupled with differences in growth rates, the results reveal that S. arenicola uses interference competition at the expense of growth, whereas S. tropica preferentially employs a strategy of exploitation competition. The results support the ecological divergence of two co-occurring and closely related species of marine bacteria by providing evidence they have evolved fundamentally different strategies to compete in marine sediments.
OI Duncan, Katherine R./0000-0002-3670-4849
TC 11
Z9 11
SN 1751-7362
EI 1751-7370
PD FEB
PY 2016
VL 10
IS 2
BP 478
EP 490
DI 10.1038/ismej.2015.128
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Microbiology
UT WOS:000368561100017
PM 26241505
ER

PT J
AU Houle, JE
   de Castro, F
   Cronin, MA
   Farnsworth, KD
   Gosch, M
   Reid, DG
AF Houle, Jennifer E.
   de Castro, Francisco
   Cronin, Michelle A.
   Farnsworth, Keith D.
   Gosch, Martha
   Reid, David G.
TI Effects of seal predation on a modelled marine fish community and
   consequences for a commercial fishery
SO JOURNAL OF APPLIED ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE diet choice; ecosystem-based fisheries management; fisheries; food web;
   marine mammal; resource competition; seals; size spectrum
ID TROPHIC CASCADES; DIET COMPOSITION; GREY; IRELAND; PREY; COD;
   POPULATIONS; DIGESTION; INDEXES
AB We constructed a size- and trait-based dynamic marine community model of the Celtic Sea/Biologically Sensitive Area, including grey seals Halichoerus grypus (Fabricius 1791) and harbour seals Phoca vitulina vitulina (Linnaeus 1758) to examine potential resource conflict between seals and commercial trawl fisheries. The model incorporates seal diet preference, population size and commercial fishery catch, with survey data to quantify ecological interactions between seals and fisheries. Total annual consumption by seals was an order of magnitude less than the catch of the modelled trawl fishery. Increasing fishing pressure reduced fish spawning stock biomass (SSB) much more than a proportionally equivalent increase in seal predation. For most fish species, quadrupling seal predation showed little effect on the predicted fishery catch. These results arise from relatively low seal abundance and partial niche partitioning. The fishery harvested a wider range of fish lengths and species than seals consumed. The fish community was dominated by small fish lengths and seals predated on these more than suggested by their calculated diet preference. Seal predation disproportionately affected several fish species not targeted by the fishery, but seal predation did not significantly affect the SSB of any of the species that constitute 90% of the total landings of the fishery.Synthesis and applications. Predation of fish by grey and harbour seals is unlikely to harm commercial trawl fisheries in south-west Irish waters. This conclusion differs from those of some model-based studies of other North Atlantic systems, demonstrating the need for ecosystem-specific evidence in considering such conflicts. In systems with low niche overlap between seals and fisheries, the two are largely decoupled in effect, leaving fishing pressure as the overwhelming determinant of targeted fish stock status.
RI Farnsworth, Keith/B-5546-2008; de Castro, Francisco/G-2213-2011
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 0021-8901
EI 1365-2664
PD FEB
PY 2016
VL 53
IS 1
BP 54
EP 63
DI 10.1111/1365-2664.12548
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000368088300008
ER

PT J
AU Baattrup-Pedersen, A
   Gothe, E
   Riis, T
   O'Hare, MT
AF Baattrup-Pedersen, Annette
   Gothe, Emma
   Riis, Tenna
   O'Hare, Matthew T.
TI Functional trait composition of aquatic plants can serve to disentangle
   multiple interacting stressors in lowland streams
SO SCIENCE OF THE TOTAL ENVIRONMENT
DT Article
DE Macrophyte; Weed cutting; Channelisation; Eutrophication; Habitat
   degradation; River
ID DANISH STREAMS; ENVIRONMENTAL-FACTORS; ECOLOGICAL IMPACTS; BRITISH
   RIVERS; SPECIES TRAITS; LAND-USE; MACROPHYTES; WATER; COMMUNITIES;
   MANAGEMENT
AB Historically, close attention has been paid to negative impacts associated with nutrient loads to streams and rivers, but today hydromorphological alterations are considered increasingly implicated when lowland streams do not achieve good ecological status. Here, we explore if trait-abundance patterns of aquatic plants change along gradients in hydromorphological degradation and eutrophication in lowland stream sites located in Denmark. Specifically, we hypothesised that: i) changes in trait-abundance patterns occur along gradients in hydromorphological degradation and ii) trait-abundance patterns can serve to disentangle effects of eutrophication and hydromorphological degradation in lowland streams reflecting that the mechanisms behind changes differ. We used monitoring data from a total of 147 stream reaches with combined data on aquatic plant species abundance, catchment land use, hydromorphological alterations (i.e. planform, cross section, weed cutting) and water chemistry parameters. Traits related to life form, dispersal, reproduction and survival together with ecological preference values for nutrients and light (Ellenberg N and L) were allocated to 41 species representing 79% of the total species pool. We found clear evidence that habitat degradation (hydromorphological alterations and eutrophication) mediated selective changes in the trait-abundance patterns of the plant community. Specific traits could distinguish hydromorphological degradation (free-floating, surface; anchored floating leaves; anchored heterophylly) from eutrophication (free-floating, submerged; leaf area). We provide a conceptual framework for interpretation of how eutrophication and hydromorphological degradation interact and how this is reflected in trait-abundance patterns in aquatic plant communities in lowland streams. Our findings support the merit of trait-based approaches in biomonitoring as they shed light on mechanisms controlling structural changes under environmental stress. The ability to disentangle several stressors is particularly important in lowland stream environments where several stressors act in concert since the impact of the most important stressor can be targeted first, which is essential to improve the ecological status. (C) 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
RI O'Hare, Matthew/F-3648-2011; Riis, Tenna/K-8346-2013
OI Riis, Tenna/0000-0003-2501-4444
TC 14
Z9 14
SN 0048-9697
EI 1879-1026
PD FEB 1
PY 2016
VL 543
BP 230
EP 238
DI 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2015.11.027
PN A
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000367635600027
PM 26584073
ER

PT J
AU Serra, SRQ
   Cobo, F
   Graca, MAS
   Doledec, S
   Feio, MJ
AF Serra, Sonia R. Q.
   Cobo, Fernando
   Graca, Manuel A. S.
   Doledec, Sylvain
   Feio, Maria Joao
TI Synthesising the trait information of European Chironomidae (Insecta:
   Diptera): Towards a new database
SO ECOLOGICAL INDICATORS
DT Article
DE Chironomidae; Fuzzy coding; Bioassessment; Eltonian traits; Grinnelian
   traits
ID ENVIRONMENTAL-FACTORS; RIPARIUS MEIGEN; MIDGES DIPTERA; WATER;
   COMMUNITY; RIVER; ECOLOGY; QUALITY; STREAMS; MACROINVERTEBRATES
AB Chironomidae are among the most conspicuous and ecological diverse group of freshwater invertebrates. They may dominate unimpacted communities in abundance and biomass, accounting for more than 50% of macroinvertebrate species in standing and flowing waters. In deep zones of eutrophic lakes and highly human-impacted streams, they are often the only family of aquatic insects remaining. In bioassessment programmes, Chironomids are often identified at the family and subfamily levels, due to difficulties in the taxonomic identification of larvae resulting from a high intrinsic morphological similarity. This may potentially result in bias as, similarly to Ephemeroptera, Trichoptera or Plecoptera, Chironomidae species, which are replaced along natural and human-impacted gradients due to differences in their ecological requirements. Recently, multiple trait-based approaches have been proposed to complement taxonomic-based assessment of streams and rivers using macroinvertebrates. However, the lack of specific trait information for Chironomidae prevents their use in the functional assessment of communities. Therefore, here, we aimed to: (1) develop a trait database for European Chironomidae genera that can be used in future bioassessment and ecological studies; (2) evaluate, by multivariate analyses, whether our new database provides additional information on Chironomidae compared to the trait information provided in the commonly used European trait database (Tachet et al., 2010); and (3) determine whether the new information on Eltonian traits (proxy to biological traits) translates the most accepted phylogenetic relationships among Chironomidae subfamilies. We gathered information on 744 species and 178 genera, for 37 traits covering 186 trait categories, and found substantial differences between our database and the commonly used European trait database. In addition, available information on traits was not always in agreement with phylogenetic relationships among subfamilies. Orthocladiinae and Chironominae which are considered sister groups in evolutionary terms actually showed confident trait relatedness based on Eltonian traits tree while the remaining relationships between subfamilies are questionable. In addition, different traits can occur in closely related taxa depending on the environmental drivers operating on their habitats. Our study reveals that the usually accepted redundancy within the Chironomidae family and subfamilies must be a product of averaging the information from finer taxonomic resolution added to the substantial lack of information for this insect group. (C) 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
RI Graca, Manuel/A-5785-2013
OI Graca, Manuel/0000-0002-7303-9382; Graca, Manuel/0000-0002-6470-8919;
   Serra, Sonia/0000-0003-4426-465X; Feio, Maria/0000-0003-0362-6802;
   Doledec, Sylvain/0000-0002-0280-7866
TC 17
Z9 18
SN 1470-160X
EI 1872-7034
PD FEB
PY 2016
VL 61
BP 282
EP 292
DI 10.1016/j.ecolind.2015.09.028
PN 2
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000367411200015
ER

PT J
AU Tecchio, S
   Chaalali, A
   Raoux, A
   Rius, AT
   Lequesne, J
   Girardin, V
   Lassalle, G
   Cachera, M
   Riou, P
   Lobry, J
   Dauvin, JC
   Niquil, N
AF Tecchio, Samuele
   Chaalali, Aurelie
   Raoux, Aurore
   Rius, Armonie Tous
   Lequesne, Justine
   Girardin, Valerie
   Lassalle, Geraldine
   Cachera, Marie
   Riou, Philippe
   Lobry, Jeremy
   Dauvin, Jean-Claude
   Niquil, Nathalie
TI Evaluating ecosystem-level anthropogenic impacts in a stressed
   transitional environment: The case of the Seine estuary
SO ECOLOGICAL INDICATORS
DT Article
DE Linear inverse model; Estuarine ecosystem; Seine estuary; English
   Channel
ID FOOD-WEB MODEL; NETWORK ANALYSIS; INFORMATION-THEORY; MARINE ECOSYSTEMS;
   TROPHIC NETWORK; EASTERN CHANNEL; FLOW NETWORKS; NORTH-SEA; FRANCE;
   BIOMASS
AB During 2002-2005, a new container terminal in the commercial harbour of Le Havre, named "Port2000", was built on the northern flank of the Seine estuary, northern France. This extension is already known to have modified the estuary current and sediment dynamics, as well as reducing biomass of the suprabenthos assemblage, for the whole downstream part of the system. However, studies on other biotic communities were largely inconclusive, and an ecosystem-wide analysis was still lacking. Here, we performed a before/after study of ecosystem dynamics of the different habitats of the Seine estuary, using a Linear Inverse Modelling technique (LIM-MCMC) to estimate all flows occurring in the food web. Ecological Network Analysis indices were calculated, summarising ecosystem functioning traits and giving indications about the habitat health status. Results showed that the southern flank (FS, Fosse Sud) exhibits all characteristics to be considered as the least stressed habitat of the estuary: system activity and functional specialisation of flows were stable between periods, ecosystem recycling processes and detrital dynamics were also stable; an increase in trophic specialisation (decrease in system omnivory) was the only change confirming a general ecological succession. The northern flank (FN, Fosse Nord), where the actual terminal was built, showed a food web with increased importance of lower trophic levels (increased detritivory and carbon recycling), increased stability and flow efficiency, but possibly regressed to a previous step in ecological succession. In the central navigation channel (CH), patterns of network indices were overall inconclusive and the general image is one of a constantly shifting food web, a condition possibly caused by the year-round dredging activities. The functioning of the Seine estuary especially of FN and FS - seems to have been modified by the combination of harbour construction and the related mitigation measures. Network indices partially captured this combination of changes and, although not fully operational yet, they are promising tools to comply with the European Union mandate of defining ecosystem health status. (c) 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
RI Lassalle, Geraldine/H-7150-2014
OI Lassalle, Geraldine/0000-0002-8548-7254; Niquil,
   Nathalie/0000-0002-0772-754X
TC 12
Z9 12
SN 1470-160X
EI 1872-7034
PD FEB
PY 2016
VL 61
BP 833
EP 845
DI 10.1016/j.ecolind.2015.10.036
PN 2
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000367411200065
ER

PT J
AU Wang, Z
   Xu, GJ
   Yang, ZW
   Xu, HL
AF Wang, Zheng
   Xu, Guangjian
   Yang, Zhongwen
   Xu, Henglong
TI An approach to determining homogeneity of body-size spectrum of
   biofilm-dwelling ciliates for colonization surveys
SO ECOLOGICAL INDICATORS
DT Article
DE Biofilm-dwelling ciliates; Body-size spectrum; Body-size distinctness;
   Homogeneity; Functional ecology; Colonization survey
ID ENVIRONMENTAL-QUALITY STATUS; ENUMERATION TIME PERIODS; MARINE
   WATER-QUALITY; COASTAL WATERS; ARTIFICIAL SUBSTRATUM; TAXONOMIC
   DISTINCTNESS; JIAOZHOU BAY; SPECIES POOL; COMMUNITIES; BIOASSESSMENT
AB Body-size spectrum, as an inherent function of a community, has been considered as a feasible bioindicator for functional ecological research and global bioassessment. To determine the homogeneity of body-size spectrum of biofilm-dwelling ciliates in colonization surveys, a 1-month baseline study was conducted at two depths of 1 and 3 m in coastal waters of the Yellow Sea, northern China. The temporal variability in body-size spectrum of the ciliate communities represented a decreasing trend at both depths. The average body-size distinctness (Delta(+)(z)) and variation in body-size distinctness (Lambda(+)(z)), which were proposed based on a trait hierarchy of body-size units, represented a high variability in the young samples (>10 days), but a low in the mature (10-28 days). The paired body-size distinctness measures (Delta(+)(z) and Lambda(+)(z)) and An showed a significant departure between young samples and the mature communities with an expected trait hierarchy of body-size spectrum. These results suggest that the paired body-size distinctness measures may be a useful indicator for determining the homogeneity of body-size spectrum in colonization surveys for biofilm-dwelling ciliates. (c) 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
TC 9
Z9 9
SN 1470-160X
EI 1872-7034
PD FEB
PY 2016
VL 61
BP 865
EP 870
DI 10.1016/j.ecolind.2015.10.039
PN 2
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000367411200068
ER

PT J
AU Muntadas, A
   de Juan, S
   Demestre, M
AF Muntadas, Alba
   de Juan, Silvia
   Demestre, Montserrat
TI Assessing functional redundancy in chronically trawled benthic
   communities
SO ECOLOGICAL INDICATORS
DT Article
DE Biological trait analysis; Trawling; Benthic infauna and epifauna;
   Resilience; Soft-bottoms; Mediterranean
ID ECOSYSTEM FUNCTION; BIOLOGICAL TRAITS; MARINE SEDIMENT; CORAL-REEFS;
   LAND-USE; BIODIVERSITY; DISTURBANCE; RESILIENCE; MANAGEMENT; DIVERSITY
AB Fishing disturbance on ecosystems leads to changes in community structure and composition, which may have drastic implications for ecosystem functional performance. Functional redundancy, defined as species sharing similar functional roles, is a community property that plays an important role in preventing functional changes in ecosystems under pressure. In this study, we suggest that functional redundancy may be achieved through trait abundance (i.e. large amounts of a trait, hereafter "common traits"), or through trait richness (i.e. large numbers of distinct taxa exhibiting the same trait, hereafter "widespread traits"). We assessed the variability of both measures obtained from epifaunal and infaunal communities in soft-bottom trawling grounds. Sampling sites were located in four Mediterranean areas that were subjected to different levels of trawling effort. Common and widespread traits measures were based on the analysis of biological traits linked to key soft-bottoms functions such as nutrient cycling, bentho-pelagic coupling and habitat provision. The role of rare species in both measures was also assessed and we observed that, in our study sites, rare species generally exhibited the same traits as the most abundant species. Common and widespread traits measures provided complementary information on benthic functional redundancy. Thus, we suggest that a combination of the two measures should be used to appropriately assess benthic functional redundancy in trawling grounds. As redundancy is a component of ecosystem resilience, functional redundancy evaluation is important to assess the overall integrity of ecosystems. (C) 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
RI Demestre, Montserrat/M-1719-2014
OI Demestre, Montserrat/0000-0003-2866-4821; de Juan Mohan,
   Silvia/0000-0002-8891-8371
TC 7
Z9 7
SN 1470-160X
EI 1872-7034
PD FEB
PY 2016
VL 61
BP 882
EP 892
DI 10.1016/j.ecolind.2015.10.041
PN 2
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000367411200070
ER

PT S
AU Tarling, GA
   Fielding, S
AF Tarling, Geraint A.
   Fielding, Sophie
BE Siegel, V
TI Swarming and Behaviour in Antarctic Krill
SO BIOLOGY AND ECOLOGY OF ANTARCTIC KRILL
SE Advances in Polar Ecology
DT Article; Book Chapter
DE Schooling; Aggregation; Swimming; Migration; Superswarm
ID DIEL VERTICAL MIGRATION; SIMULATED LIGHT REGIMES; EUPHAUSIA-SUPERBA
   DANA; ANIMAL-BORNE VIDEO; SOUTHERN-OCEAN; SCOTIA SEA; SOCIAL
   AGGREGATION; MULTIBEAM-SONAR; TEMPORAL VARIABILITY; POPULATION-DYNAMICS
AB The behavioural ecology of Antarctic krill is dominated by their tendency to swarm. They form amongst the largest monospecific aggregations of biomass in the animal kingdom, with some swarms measuring up to 100 km(2) and containing 2 million tonnes of krill. Swarms come in a multitude of shapes and sizes, and a greater understanding of the functional attributes of different swarm types is starting to emerge. This chapter will consider the spectrum of krill-swarms and -schools that have been described and some of the latest approaches taken to understand their shape and formation. The fundamental needs to avoid predation, feed, mate and spawn have often been attributed to being a major influence on swarming and we will examine these behaviours and their wider impacts. This chapter also considers how krill position themselves in the water column, altering their depth over diel and seasonal cycles, with further levels of modification depending on the environmental context. The ability of krill to migrate large distances is a major ecological feature of the Southern Ocean ecosystem, affecting the productivity of both planktonic and upper-trophic level communities, and we consider how such migrations are driven at the level of the swarm. New technologies are emerging that are providing previously unreported krill behaviours and we assess the future potential of these technologies to develop an even deeper appreciation of krill ethology. Also, we assess what impact predicted changes to the Southern Ocean environment will have on krill behavioural traits.
TC 5
Z9 5
SN 2468-5712
BN 978-3-319-29279-3; 978-3-319-29277-9
PY 2016
BP 279
EP 319
DI 10.1007/978-3-319-29279-3_8
D2 10.1007/978-3-319-29279-3
SC Life Sciences & Biomedicine - Other Topics; Environmental Sciences &
   Ecology
UT WOS:000401843300009
ER

PT S
AU Hayasaka, D
   Yamada, K
   Uchida, T
AF Hayasaka, Daisuke
   Yamada, Katsumasa
   Uchida, Taizo
BE Urabe, J
   Nakashizuka, T
TI Susceptibility of Sandy Beach Flora to the Great East Japan Earthquake
   and Tsunami in Northern Tohoku, Japan
SO ECOLOGICAL IMPACTS OF TSUNAMIS ON COASTAL ECOSYSTEMS: LESSONS FROM THE
   GREAT EAST JAPAN EARTHQUAKE
SE Ecological Research Monographs
DT Article; Book Chapter
DE Catastrophe; Clonality; Comparative study; Disturbance; Ecological
   impacts; Plant functional traits; Raunkiaer life form; Species'
   sensitivity; Vegetation
ID INDIAN-OCEAN TSUNAMI; ECOLOGICAL IMPACTS; PRIMARY SUCCESSION; PHUKET
   ISLAND; PLANT TRAITS; OKI TSUNAMI; RECOVERY; DISTURBANCE; VEGETATION;
   DYNAMICS
AB Coastal ecosystems in northern Japan have been undergoing succession and recovery since the Great East Japan Earthquake and Tsunami. In order to elucidate the mechanisms of vegetation responses to such catastrophe, we assessed the differences in susceptibility of sandy beach flora based on species composition and trait group composition as indicated by differences in ecomorphological traits of species, namely, Raunkiaer life form and clonality, to the tsunami. From the field observation and aerial photo interpretation, we found the clear landscape change of the four studied beaches before and after the tsunami. Osuka beach (Aomori Prefecture), which had no beach protection structures, including revetments or wave-dissipating blocks, and remained in a natural condition before the tsunami, experienced a relatively small wave impact (about 10 m height) associated with the disturbance. Tofugaura and Aketo beaches (Iwate Prefecture), which were exposed to a wave height of more than 20 m, were severely damaged, with fracturing and collapse of protective structures after the tsunami. Revetments at Kuji (Iwate Prefecture), which was subjected to a wave height of approximately 14 m, were not obviously damaged by the tsunami. Among the 103 plant species recorded in the four studied beaches, the occurrence of 14 species (13.6 %) changed significantly after the tsunami. In the case of the Raunkiaer life forms, the number of therophytes (mainly non-beach species) and chamaephytes increased after the tsunami on Aketo and Kuji beaches, which had high anthropogenic disturbance before the tsunami, and many beach geophytes decreased on Osuka beach. Impacts of the tsunami on woody species were smaller than on herbaceous species. Except Aketo beach, the proportions of clonality among the beaches did not clearly change before and after the disturbance. Rhizomatous plants showed relatively good tolerance to the tsunami, whereas monophytes and stoloniferous species underwent damages by sand erosion and accretion, perhaps due to their shallow roots, and could not protect beaches from coastal disturbances. Thus, beaches such as Aketo and Tofugaura, with a high proportion of ephemeral monophytes and stoloniferous species, may be more vulnerable to tsunamis.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 2191-0707
BN 978-4-431-56448-5; 978-4-431-56446-1
PY 2016
BP 271
EP 288
DI 10.1007/978-4-431-56448-5_17
D2 10.1007/978-4-431-56448-5
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000402094400018
ER

PT J
AU Guo, L
   Yang, S
   Li, MM
   Meng, ZN
   Lin, HR
AF Guo, L.
   Yang, S.
   Li, M. M.
   Meng, Z. N.
   Lin, H. R.
TI Divergence and polymorphism analysis of IGF1Ra and IGF1Rb from
   orange-spotted grouper, Epinephelus coioides (Hamilton)
SO GENETICS AND MOLECULAR RESEARCH
DT Article
DE IGF1Ra; IGF1Rb; Epinephelus coioides; Polymorphism; Nucleotide diversity
ID RECEPTOR IGF1R; MOLECULAR-CLONING; GROWTH; ASSOCIATION; INSULIN;
   ZEBRAFISH; TRAITS; GENE; EXPRESSION; SOFTWARE
AB Orange-spotted grouper (Epinephelus coioides) is one of the most important marine fish and has a high market value. The insulin-like growth factor type 1 receptor (IGF1R) is a component of the insulin-like growth factor signaling system, and demonstrates important roles during growth. Based on information from livestock, we used IGF1R as a candidate gene to survey single nucleotide polymorphisms. In the present study, the sequences of IGF1Ra and IGF1Rb from orange-spotted grouper were obtained from the genome sequences and their clustering in clades a and b, respectively, was confirmed by phylogenetic analysis. Fourteen critical amino acids underlying functional divergence were detected between the two clades, revealing the molecular basis of their functional differences. Nearly one-fourth (22 kbp) of the genomic sequence of IGF1Ra was sequenced in a mass cross population, and nucleotide diversity and linkage disequilibrium levels were investigated. Nucleotide diversity was 0.00328 for pi and 0.00344 for theta(w). The half decay of the squared allele-frequency correlation was 10,835 base pairs. Comparatively, the relatively high level of linkage and the significant deviation from neutrality-based codons in IGR1R showed that this gene was under selection. A site (KR269824.1:g.63762C>T), located in the sixth intron, was significantly associated with eyeball diameter (P = 1.39 x 10(-4), Q-value: 2.33 x 10(-2)), which accounted for 11.1% of phenotypic variance. These results highlight the important function of IGF1R in orange-spotted grouper and may be beneficial in the breeding of this species.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1676-5680
PY 2016
VL 15
IS 4
AR 15048768
DI 10.4238/gmr15048768
SC Biochemistry & Molecular Biology; Genetics & Heredity
UT WOS:000394581500028
PM 27813576
ER

PT J
AU Dalzochio, MS
   Baldin, R
   Stenert, C
   Maltchik, L
AF Dalzochio, Marina S.
   Baldin, Renata
   Stenert, Cristina
   Maltchik, Leonardo
TI How does the management of rice in natural ponds alter aquatic insect
   community functional structure?
SO MARINE AND FRESHWATER RESEARCH
DT Article
DE agroecosystems; biodiversity; organic farming; traits
ID SOUTHERN BRAZIL WETLANDS; MACROINVERTEBRATE COMMUNITIES; BIODIVERSITY
   CONSERVATION; ENVIRONMENTAL GRADIENTS; BIOLOGICAL TRAITS; SPECIES
   RICHNESS; BODY-SIZE; LAND-USE; DIVERSITY; RESPONSES
AB Changes to biodiversity have mainly been assessed using taxonomic diversity indices. Although these approaches contribute to our scientific understanding of species richness and composition patterns, trait-based metrics may be more useful for detecting responses to land-use change. We compared functional diversity of aquatic insect communities along a gradient of agricultural intensification. Our goal was to compare functional redundancy, functional richness, functional evenness and functional divergence among natural ponds, and organic and conventional rice fields. We recorded 15606 aquatic insects distributed across 61 genera. The highest functional redundancy and richness were observed in the natural ponds, followed by organic rice fields and conventional ones. The functional composition varied among natural ponds and rice fields, and differed between organic and conventional rice fields. Organic management favoured the establishment of some pond insect traits, such as predatory taxa, in rice agroecosystems. Our analysis suggests that the conversion of ponds to rice fields results in a shift to less specialised aquatic insect communities with altered functional composition groups. Nevertheless, this result should not be seen as a negative reflection on organic rice fields, because organic rice production affords a better compromise between agricultural production and ecosystem function than conventional agriculture.
OI Dalzochio, Marina/0000-0001-9241-921X
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 1323-1650
EI 1448-6059
PY 2016
VL 67
IS 11
BP 1644
EP 1654
DI 10.1071/MF14246
SC Fisheries; Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000387256400005
ER

PT J
AU Saggese, I
   Sara, G
   Dondero, F
AF Saggese, Ilenia
   Sara, Gianluca
   Dondero, Francesco
TI Silver Nanoparticles Affect Functional Bioenergetic Traits in the
   Invasive Red Sea Mussel Brachidontes pharaonis
SO BIOMED RESEARCH INTERNATIONAL
DT Article
ID ISOPOD PORCELLIONIDES PRUINOSUS; MYTILUS-EDULIS; HEART-RATE; AQUATIC
   ENVIRONMENT; MEDITERRANEAN SEA; RISK-ASSESSMENT; BLUE MUSSEL;
   DANIO-RERIO; TOXICITY; NANOMATERIALS
AB We investigated the functional trait responses to 5 nm metallic silver nanoparticle (AgNPs) exposure in the Lessepsian-entry bivalve B. pharaonis. Respiration rate (oxygen consumption), heartbeat rate, and absorption efficiency were evaluated across an 8-day exposure period in mesocosmal conditions. Basal reference values from not-exposed specimens were statistically compared with those obtained from animals treated with three sublethal nanoparticle concentrations (2 mu gL(-1), 20 mu gL(- 1), and 40 mu gL(-1)). Our data showed statistically significant effects on the average respiration rate of B. pharaonis. Moreover, complex nonlinear dynamics were observed as a function of the concentration level and time. Heartbeat rates largely increased with no acclimation in animals exposed to the two highest levels with similar temporal dynamics. Eventually, a decreasing trend for absorption efficiency might indicate energetic constraints. In general, these data support the possible impact of engineered nanomaterials in marine environments and support the relevance of functional trait assessment in present and future ecotoxicological studies.
OI Dondero, Francesco/0000-0001-7945-3712
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 2314-6133
EI 2314-6141
PY 2016
AR 1872351
DI 10.1155/2016/1872351
SC Biotechnology & Applied Microbiology; Research & Experimental Medicine
UT WOS:000385755800001
ER

PT J
AU Kogan, I
   Romano, C
AF Kogan, Ilja
   Romano, Carlo
TI REDESCRIPTION OF SAURICHTHYS MADAGASCARIENSIS PIVETEAU, 1945
   (ACTINOPTERYGII, EARLY TRIASSIC), WITH IMPLICATIONS FOR THE EARLY
   SAURICHTHYID MORPHOTYPE
SO JOURNAL OF VERTEBRATE PALEONTOLOGY
DT Article
ID HIGH-RESOLUTION BIOCHRONOLOGY; NORTHERN INDIAN MARGIN; RAY-FINNED
   FISHES; DIVERSITY DYNAMICS; AXIAL SKELETON; AMMONOID RECOVERY; ANHUI
   PROVINCE; FOSSIL FISHES; BONY FISHES; EVOLUTION
AB Ray-finned fishes of the Saurichthyidae radiated rapidly after the end-Permian mass extinction event and became important predators within Triassic marine and freshwater ecosystems. Despite their extensive fossil record, the early evolution of saurichthyids still remains obscure. In an attempt to address this problem, we restudied Saurichthys madagascariensis, a key species from the Early Triassic of Madagascar (maximum age range middle Dienerian-early Smithian according to the available biostratigraphic data discussed herein), on the basis of similar to 160 specimens, including several new, nearly complete individuals. Saurichthys madagascariensis is a medium-sized (ca. 60 cm) saurichthyid with a well-ossified circumorbital series, a suborbital, an antoperculum, one pair of branchiostegal rays, all fins with segmented, branched lepidotrichia and fringing fulcra, and an extensive squamation consisting of specialized scales arranged in six longitudinal rows, with rhombic scales in between. A series of 'L'-shaped ventrolateral scales may be apomorphic for the Madagascan species. Comparisons among early saurichthyids reveal some shared traits, based upon which we hypothesize that the primitive condition of Saurichthyidae includes (1) broad scutes along the dorsal and ventral midlines articulating with one another via a specialized 'keel and groove articulation'; (2) high, anteriorly inclined flank scales subdivided by the lateral line sensory canal into a tuberculated dorsal and a vertically striated ventral portion; (3) posteriorly inclined ventrolateral scales; and (4) a 1: 2 relationship between the mid-lateral scales and the neural arches. These data may help to resolve problems in phylogenetic studies concerning synapomorphies and convergences of saurichthyids with other taxa.
RI Romano, Carlo/H-8903-2012
OI Romano, Carlo/0000-0003-4438-2736; Kogan, Ilja/0000-0002-4464-6722
TC 7
Z9 7
SN 0272-4634
EI 1937-2809
PY 2016
VL 36
IS 4
AR e1151886
DI 10.1080/02724634.2016.1151886
SC Paleontology
UT WOS:000380558100016
ER

PT J
AU Polly, PD
   Stayton, CT
   Dumont, ER
   Pierce, SE
   Rayfield, EJ
   Angielczyk, KD
AF Polly, P. David
   Stayton, C. Tristan
   Dumont, Elizabeth R.
   Pierce, Stephanie E.
   Rayfield, Emily J.
   Angielczyk, Kenneth D.
TI COMBINING GEOMETRIC MORPHOMETRICS AND FINITE ELEMENT ANALYSIS WITH
   EVOLUTIONARY MODELING: TOWARDS A SYNTHESIS
SO JOURNAL OF VERTEBRATE PALEONTOLOGY
DT Article
ID EARED SLIDER TURTLE; VIVO BONE STRAIN; FUNCTIONAL-MORPHOLOGY; EMYDINE
   TURTLES; FOSSIL RECORD; SHELL SHAPE; IN-VIVO; ECOLOGICAL
   DIVERSIFICATION; MOLECULAR PHYLOGENETICS; MECHANICAL PERFORMANCE
AB Geometric morphometrics (GM) and finite element analysis (FEA) are increasingly common techniques for the study of form and function. We show how principles of quantitative evolution in continuous phenotypic traits can link the two techniques, allowing hypotheses about the relative importance of different functions to be tested in a phylogenetic and evolutionary framework. Finite element analysis is used to derive quantitative surfaces that describe the comparative performance of different morphologies in a morphospace derived from GM. The combination of two or more performance surfaces describes a quantitative adaptive landscape that can be used to predict the direction morphological evolution would take if a combination of functions was selected for. Predicted paths of evolution also can be derived for hypotheses about the relative importance of multiple functions, which can be tested against evolutionary pathways that are documented by phylogenies or fossil sequences. Magnitudes of evolutionary trade-offs between functions can be estimated using maximum likelihood. We apply these methods to an earlier study of carapace strength and hydrodynamic efficiency in emydid turtles. We find that strength and hydrodynamic efficiency explain about 45% of the variance in shell shape; drift and other unidentified functional factors are necessary to explain the remaining variance. Measurement of the proportional trade-off between shell strength and hydrodynamic efficiency shows that throughout the Cenozoic aquatic turtles generally sacrificed strength for streamlining and terrestrial species favored stronger shells; this suggests that the selective regime operating on small to mid-sized emydids has remained relatively static.
RI Rayfield, Emily/F-5038-2010
OI Rayfield, Emily/0000-0002-2618-750X; Polly, P. David/0000-0001-7338-8526
TC 17
Z9 17
SN 0272-4634
EI 1937-2809
PY 2016
VL 36
IS 4
AR e1111225
DI 10.1080/02724634.2016.1111225
SC Paleontology
UT WOS:000380558100001
ER

PT J
AU Fernandez-Osuna, MA
   Scarabotti, PA
AF Alejandra Fernandez-Osuna, Maria
   Augusto Scarabotti, Pablo
TI Phenotypic plasticity associated to environmental hypoxia in the
   neotropical serrasalmid Piaractus mesopotamicus (Holmberg, 1887)
   (Characiformes: Serrasalmidae)
SO Neotropical Ichthyology
DT Article
DE Aquatic surface respiration; Characiformes; Dermal lip protuberances;
   Reaction norm; River floodplains
ID AQUATIC SURFACE RESPIRATION; OXYGEN-DEFICIENT WATERS; TAMBAQUI
   COLOSSOMA-MACROPOMUM; DERMAL LIP PROTUBERANCES; CARDIORESPIRATORY
   REFLEXES; POECILIA-RETICULATA; FISH; TOLERANCE; ADAPTATIONS; BEHAVIOR
AB Many South American characid fishes develop reversible dermal protuberances in the jaws to optimize aquatic surface respiration (ASR) during hypoxia. To date, basic aspects of this adaptation remain unknown, mainly due to the scarcity of experimental studies. In laboratory experiments, we determined time necessary for the complete formation and reversion of these structures in Piaractus mesopotamicus, and studied comparatively behavioral, morphological, and respiratory responses along gradients of dissolved oxygen (DO) concentration. Morphological changes during hypoxia consisted in dermal protuberances of lower lip, anterior border of maxillary and distal border of opercular valve, increasing the known number of structures modified. These structures developed completely in less than 6 hours and reversed in less than 3 hours. Most of observed traits showed a logistic response curve with threshold DO values between 0.90 and 2.70 mgL". Respiratory frequency and opercular valve development showed similar threshold values above the level of tolerance of DO, whereas ASR and dermal protuberances of the jaws showed threshold values below this level. This observation supports the functional link between these groups of behavioral and morphological traits. This study demonstrates that this species is able to modify reversibly portions of the respiratory system to optimize responses to hypoxia.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1679-6225
PY 2016
VL 14
IS 2
AR e150187
DI 10.1590/1982-0224-20150187
SC Zoology
UT WOS:000380831900020
ER

PT J
AU Morton, B
   Machado, FM
   Passos, FD
AF Morton, Brian
   Machado, Fabrizio Marcondes
   Passos, Flavio Dias
TI The organs of prey capture and digestion in the miniature predatory
   bivalve Spheniopsis brasiliensis (Anomalodesmata: Cuspidarioidea:
   Spheniopsidae) expose a novel life-history trait
SO JOURNAL OF NATURAL HISTORY
DT Article
DE Bivalvia; septibranch; prey processing; reproductive strategy;
   self-fertilisation; internal brooding; univoltism
ID FUNCTIONAL-MORPHOLOGY; CAMPOS BASIN; DEEP-SEA; MOLLUSCA; BRAZIL;
   VERTICORDIIDAE; LYONSIELLIDAE; AFFINITIES; CYAMIOIDEA; PELECYPODA
AB Spheniopsis brasiliensis, from depths of 17-148 m off the southern Atlantic coast of Brazil, is a predator of epipsammic micro-crustaceans which it sucks into the infra-septal chamber using a raptorial inhalant siphon and internally generated hydrostatic suction forces. Prey items, which include ostracods, are thought to be pushed into the funnel-shaped mouth using the foot. The stomach is capacious with a short style sac conjoined briefly with the mid gut and possessing a stubby crystalline style. Internal stomach architecture is simplified, with no identifiable sorting areas (unlike other cuspidarioids) and lined virtually completely by a gastric shield. The exoskeletal remains of digested prey are held in the posterior end of the stomach and not in a specialised waste storage pouch as in the con-familial Grippina coronata. The mid gut, hind gut and rectum are all extremely narrow and, thus, only the smallest of faeces can be accommodated and transmitted for anal discharge. Spheniopsis brasiliensis, like G. coronata is a self-fertilising simultaneous hermaphrodite with encapsulated lecithotrophic eggs brooded internally. Both taxa are thus ovovivaporous. It is also believed that both taxa are univoltine so that larvae and the exoskeletal prey remains are all released post mortem. Cuspidariids are generally regarded as dioecious but, recently, Cardiomya costellata has been shown to be a non-brooding simultaneous hermaphrodite. The distinguishing characters between cuspidariids and spheniopsids thus appear to be their differing reproductive strategies and life history traits.
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 0022-2933
EI 1464-5262
PY 2016
VL 50
IS 27-28
BP 1725
EP 1748
DI 10.1080/00222933.2016.1155780
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Zoology
UT WOS:000377222100004
ER

PT J
AU Grewell, BJ
   Thomason, MJS
   Futrell, CJ
   Iannucci, M
   Drenovsky, RE
AF Grewell, Brenda J.
   Thomason, Meghan J. Skaer
   Futrell, Caryn J.
   Iannucci, Maria
   Drenovsky, Rebecca E.
TI Trait responses of invasive aquatic macrophyte congeners: colonizing
   diploid outperforms polyploid
SO AOB PLANTS
DT Article
DE Aquatic plants; functional plant traits; invasion ecology; invasive
   plants; Ludwigia; polyploidy; reproductive allocation
ID SUCCESS; REPRODUCTION; ONAGRACEAE; CYTOTYPES; PLANTS; ALIEN
AB Understanding traits underlying colonization and niche breadth of invasive plants is key to developing sustainable management solutions to curtail invasions at the establishment phase, when efforts are often most effective. The aim of this study was to evaluate how two invasive congeners differing in ploidy respond to high and low resource availability following establishment from asexual fragments. Because polyploids are expected to have wider niche breadths than diploid ancestors, we predicted that a decaploid species would have superior ability to maximize resource uptake and use, and outperform a diploid congener when colonizing environments with contrasting light and nutrient availability. A mesocosm experiment was designed to test the main and interactive effects of ploidy (diploid and decaploid) and soil nutrient availability (low and high) nested within light environments (shade and sun) of two invasive aquatic plant congeners. Counter to our predictions, the diploid congener outperformed the decaploid in the early stage of growth. Although growth was similar and low in the cytotypes at low nutrient availability, the diploid species had much higher growth rate and biomass accumulation than the polyploid with nutrient enrichment, irrespective of light environment. Our results also revealed extreme differences in time to anthesis between the cytotypes. The rapid growth and earlier flowering of the diploid congener relative to the decaploid congener represent alternate strategies for establishment and success.
OI Skaer Thomason, Meghan/0000-0001-9485-9729
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 2041-2851
PY 2016
VL 8
AR plw014
DI 10.1093/aobpla/plw014
SC Plant Sciences; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000376446700007
PM 26921139
ER

PT J
AU Lopez, AS
   Rodriguez, AG
   Lopez, GG
AF Salmeron Lopez, Arturo
   Gonzalez Rodriguez, Arianna
   Geada Lopez, Gretel
TI Functional types of plants in response to disturbance in a coastal
   microphyll semi-deciduous forest of eastern Cuba
SO BOSQUE
DT Article
DE perturbation levels; dynamo-genetic species; redundancy; successional
   stages
ID DIVERSITY; INDIA
AB As a consequence of human disturbance in the semi-deciduous forest in Siboney-Jutici Ecological Reserve, several changes have been produced. Futures actions for restoration in this vegetation require knowing the functional roll of the species during the post-perturbations process. The disturbance level, considering its sources and characteristics, was assessed in some sites. Functional types were determined by the analysis of relative abundance in differently disturbed sites and the species functional traits (light demand or shade tolerance, fruits types and seed dispersion). With this information a cluster analysis was realized. Three functional types in response to disturbance were determined: spreaders, colonizers and stabilizer. Into each functional type, a group of species that defines the post disturbance dynamics and propitiates the restoration (dynamo-genetic species) was distinguished from another group of species (diversifiers) which confers diversity, redundancy and resilience to the system. The species redundancy within the functional types, although with differences in their abundances, allows them to be present and develop their functions in all disturbance levels. Because of this, the knowledge and use of the functional type constitute an important factor for developing ecological restoration strategies in this forest.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0717-9200
PY 2016
VL 37
IS 1
BP 135
EP 145
DI 10.4067/S0717-92002016000100013
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Forestry
UT WOS:000373928600013
ER

PT J
AU Szostek, CL
   Murray, LG
   Bell, E
   Rayner, G
   Kaiser, MJ
AF Szostek, Claire L.
   Murray, Lee G.
   Bell, Ewen
   Rayner, Gemma
   Kaiser, Michel J.
TI Natural vs. fishing disturbance: drivers of community composition on
   traditional king scallop, Pecten maximus, fishing grounds
SO ICES JOURNAL OF MARINE SCIENCE
DT Article; Proceedings Paper
CT ICES Scientific Symposium on Effects of Fishing on Benthic Fauna,
   Habitat and Ecosystem Function
CY JUN 16-19, 2014
CL Tromso, NORWAY
DE bed shear stress; benthic community composition; fishing intensity;
   habitat impacts; habitat recovery; scallop dredging; VMS data
ID MARINE BENTHIC COMMUNITIES; SOUTHERN NORTH-SEA; LONG-TERM IMPACTS;
   ENGLISH-CHANNEL; GEORGES BANK; PHYSICAL DISTURBANCE; TRAWL DISTURBANCE;
   BIOLOGICAL TRAITS; CONTINENTAL-SHELF; RECOVERY RATES
AB Scallop dredging is considered to be one of the most damaging forms of fishing to benthic habitats, although these effects vary among different habitats. The present study characterizes the biological communities that occur within the spatial limits of the English Channel king scallop dredge fishery in relation to key environmental drivers [mean seabed temperature; seabed temperature range; interannual temperature variation; bed shear stress (BSS); substrate characteristics; and depth] and across a gradient of scallop dredging intensity derived from vessel monitoring system data. Dredge fishing intensity was not correlated with species richness, species diversity, or species composition. However, increasing tidal BSS had a significant negative correlation with species richness and diversity. This outcome indicates that it is not possible to demonstrate that there is an effect of scallop fishing within the current spatial limits of the king scallop dredge fishery. This may be because historical dredge fishing could have already altered the benthic communities within the area of the scallop fishery to those that are resilient to scallop dredging, or that fishing disturbance has no impact over and above natural physical disturbance within the fishery. An analysis of biological and life history traits revealed that there was no relationship between recent fishing intensity, or BSS, and the functional composition of the communities present. However, even the lowest BSS values in the present study could be considered relatively high compared with areas outside the spatial boundaries of the fishery. Two distinct habitat groups were identified, based on the environmental drivers. These two groups were largely characterized by depth: deep (western) and shallow (eastern) sites. Species with traits that increase resilience to physical disturbance were abundant across all sample sites. Management concerning the environmental impacts of the fishery is discussed in terms of the spatial footprint of the fishery and predicted recovery time-scales for the associated benthic communities.
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 1054-3139
EI 1095-9289
PD JAN
PY 2016
VL 73
SU 1
BP 70
EP 83
DI 10.1093/icesjms/fsv152
SC Fisheries; Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000371141000007
ER

PT J
AU Jimenez, H
   Dumas, P
   Mouillot, D
   Bigot, L
   Ferraris, J
AF Jimenez, Haizea
   Dumas, Pascal
   Mouillot, David
   Bigot, Lionel
   Ferraris, Jocelyne
TI Harvesting effects on functional structure and composition of tropical
   invertebrate assemblages
SO ICES JOURNAL OF MARINE SCIENCE
DT Article
DE BTA; marine protected areas; shellfishing; species composition; tropical
   benthos
ID CORAL-REEF ECOSYSTEMS; UPPER RHONE RIVER; COMMUNITY STRUCTURE;
   BIOLOGICAL TRAITS; SPECIES TRAITS; COASTAL ECOSYSTEMS; BENTHIC
   MACROINVERTEBRATES; HUMAN EXPLOITATION; PROTECTED AREAS; MARINE BENTHOS
AB Anthropogenic disturbances affect ecosystem structure and functioning. The quantification of their impacts on highly diverse and structurally complex ecosystems, such as coral reefs, is challenging. These communities are facing rising fishing pressure, particularly on Pacific Islands such as New Caledonia. The main objective was to quantify harvesting effects on invertebrate assemblages across two contrasting habitats (soft-and hard-bottom), by comparing communities in marine protected areas (MPAs) with non-MPAs using 10 biological and ecological traits. Patterns of trait composition were compared with those of species composition by non-metric multidimensional scaling and permutational analysis of variance analyses. Traits most responsible for differences between MPAs and non-MPAs were determined using SIMPER analysis, and predictions on shellfishing effects were discussed. A total of 248 species were recorded in hard-bottom communities, mainly characterized by mobile epifauna living on corals, crawling, and possessing a shell (molluscs) or a cuticle (crabs and echinoderms). Soft-bottom habitats contained 166 species, dominated by burrowing and sedentary species, especially shelled (largely bivalves) and worm-like organisms. Clear differences in species and trait composition between MPA and non-MPAs were highlighted in both habitats. Harvesting activities have community-wide effects that change the functional composition of invertebrate assemblages, in particular in terms of living habits and mobility. The observed shifts in benthic communities can affect the functioning of tropical coastal ecosystems and need to be included in small-scale fisheries management in poorly known tropical environments.
OI Dumas, Pascal/0000-0001-7369-8989
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 1054-3139
EI 1095-9289
PD JAN-FEB
PY 2016
VL 73
IS 2
BP 420
EP 428
DI 10.1093/icesjms/fsv179
SC Fisheries; Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000371141600023
ER

PT J
AU Lumaga, MRB
   Santangelo, A
   Strumia, S
AF Lumaga, Maria Rosaria Barone
   Santangelo, Annalisa
   Strumia, Sandro
TI Morpho-functional traits influencing the fitness of highly endangered
   Eokochia saxicola (Guss.) Freitag & G. Kadereit (Amaranthaceae)
SO FLORA
DT Article
DE Halophyte; Morphology; Sea cliff; Seed germination; Superhydrophobic
   surfaces
ID CAMPHOROSMEAE CAMPHOROSMOIDEAE; PLANT-SURFACES; CHENOPODIACEAE;
   DISPERSAL; POLLEN; DUST; INSPIRATION; SEEDS
AB Eokochia saxicola (Guss.) Freitag & G. Kadereit is a very rare and endangered endemic species of Southern Italy and one of the rarest plants in Europe. It grows only on calcareous or volcanic sea cliffs and is supposed to be the remnant of an old lineage, being considered an ancestor within the Chenolea Glade (tribe Camphorosmeae). Given that data on the biology and ecology of this species are limited, the aim of this study is to increase the knowledge of reproductive and vegetative structures and to investigate the occurrence and nature of potential critical steps in the life cycle affecting the species fitness. Micro- and macro-morphology of leaves, flowers and diaspores have been analysed together with seed germination in different environmental conditions.
   Morphological analyses have improved the description of the species (flowers are sub-ternate, subsessile at the axils of leaves and show protogyny) and highlighted the occurrence of peculiar and interesting characteristics of the epidermis, such as the presence of superhydrophobic surfaces both on the vegetative and reproductive structures. These surfaces are discussed with respect to removing dust and salt from leaves and protecting perianth from moulds. Seed germination is inhibited even by moderate environmental salinity but readily recovers in fresh water.
   Results are discussed with regard to the adaptive strategy of E. saxicola to the peculiar habitat of coastal cliffs, e.g., salinity stress and geographic isolation, and to the current hypothesis on the origin of the Chenolea Glade. (C) 2015 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.
OI Strumia, Sandro/0000-0002-8304-7837
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0367-2530
EI 1618-0585
PY 2016
VL 218
BP 11
EP 17
DI 10.1016/j.flora.2015.11.005
SC Plant Sciences; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000370456800003
ER

PT J
AU Singh, R
   Ingole, BS
AF Singh, R.
   Ingole, B. S.
TI Structure and function of nematode communities across the Indian western
   continental margin and its oxygen minimum zone
SO BIOGEOSCIENCES
DT Article
ID DEEP-SEA; ARABIAN SEA; ORGANIC-MATTER; SPECIES-DIVERSITY; MATURITY
   INDEX; PACIFIC-OCEAN; NORTH-SEA; ASSEMBLAGES; HYPOXIA; BIODIVERSITY
AB We studied patterns of nematode distribution along the western Indian continental margin to determine the influence of habitat heterogeneity and low oxygen levels on the community's taxonomic and functional structure. A single transect, perpendicular to the coast at 14 degrees N latitude was sampled from 34 to 2546m depth for biological and environmental variables during August 2007. The oxygen minimum zone extended from 102 to 1001 m. Nematodes (described and undescribed) were identified to species and classified according to biological and functional traits. A total of 110 nematode species belonging to 24 families were found along the transect. Three depth zones were identified: the shelf (depth range: 34-102 m; highest nematode mean density: 176.6 +/- 37 ind 10 cm(-2)), the slope (525-1524 m; 124.3 +/- 16 ind 10 cm(-2)), and the basin (2001-2546 m; 62.9 +/- 2 ind 10 cm(-2)). Across the entire study area, the dominant species were Terschellingia longicaudata, Desmodora sp. 1, Sphaerolaimus gracilis, and Theristus ensifer; their maximum density was at shelf stations. Nematode communities in different zones differed in species composition. Chromadorita sp. 2 (2.78 %) and Sphaerolaimus gracilis (2.21 %) were dominant on the shelf, whereas Terschellingia longicaudata (4.73 %) and Desmodora sp. 1 (4.42 %) were dominant on the slope, but in the basin, Halalaimus sp. 1(1.11 %) and Acantholaimus elegans (1.11 %) were dominant. The information in a particular functional group was not a simple reflection of the information in species abundance. Ecological information captured by adult length, adult shape, and life-history strategy was less site-specific and thus differed notably from information contained in other taxonomic groups. The functional composition of nematodes was strongly linked to the organic-carbon and dissolved-oxygen concentration. Seven species were found exclusively in the oxygen minimum zone: Pselionema sp. 1, Choanolaimus sp. 2, Halichoanolaimus sp. 1, Cobbia dentata, Daptonema sp. 1, Trissonchulus sp. 1, and Minolaimus sp. 1. Correlation with a number of environmental variables indicated that food quantity (measured as the organic-carbon content and chlorophyll content) and oxygen level were the major factors that influenced nematode community structure and function.
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 1726-4170
EI 1726-4189
PY 2016
VL 13
IS 1
BP 191
EP 209
DI 10.5194/bg-13-191-2016
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Geology
UT WOS:000369524000013
ER

PT J
AU Lange, K
   Townsend, CR
   Matthaei, CD
AF Lange, Katharina
   Townsend, Colin Richard
   Matthaei, Christoph David
TI A trait-based framework for stream algal communities
SO ECOLOGY AND EVOLUTION
DT Article
DE Agricultural land use; benthic stream algae; conceptual model; multiple
   stressors; periphyton
ID DIATOM ECOLOGICAL GUILDS; MATRIX CONCEPTUAL-MODEL; BENTHIC ALGAE;
   SPECIES TRAITS; AGRICULTURAL CATCHMENT; PERIPHYTON COMMUNITIES; MULTIPLE
   STRESSORS; WATER ABSTRACTION; FUNCTIONAL TRAITS; BIOLOGICAL TRAITS
AB The use of trait-based approaches to detect effects of land use and climate change on terrestrial plant and aquatic phytoplankton communities is increasing, but such a framework is still needed for benthic stream algae. Here we present a conceptual framework of morphological, physiological, behavioural and life-history traits relating to resource acquisition and resistance to disturbance. We tested this approach by assessing the relationships between multiple anthropogenic stressors and algal traits at 43 stream sites. Our "natural experiment" was conducted along gradients of agricultural land-use intensity (0-95% of the catchment in high-producing pasture) and hydrological alteration (0-92% streamflow reduction resulting from water abstraction for irrigation) as well as related physicochemical variables (total nitrogen concentration and deposited fine sediment). Strategic choice of study sites meant that agricultural intensity and hydrological alteration were uncorrelated. We studied the relationships of seven traits (with 23 trait categories) to our environmental predictor variables using general linear models and an information-theoretic model-selection approach. Life form, nitrogen fixation and spore formation were key traits that showed the strongest relationships with environmental stressors. Overall, FI (farming intensity) exerted stronger effects on algal communities than hydrological alteration. The large-bodied, non-attached, filamentous algae that dominated under high farming intensities have limited dispersal abilities but may cope with unfavourable conditions through the formation of spores. Antagonistic interactions between FI and flow reduction were observed for some trait variables, whereas no interactions occurred for nitrogen concentration and fine sediment. Our conceptual framework was well supported by tests of ten specific hypotheses predicting effects of resource supply and disturbance on algal traits. Our study also shows that investigating a fairly comprehensive set of traits can help shed light on the drivers of algal community composition in situations where multiple stressors are operating. Further, to understand non-linear and non-additive effects of such drivers, communities need to be studied along multiple gradients of natural variation or anthropogenic stressors.
OI Lange, Katharina/0000-0002-5016-4527
TC 24
Z9 24
SN 2045-7758
PD JAN
PY 2016
VL 6
IS 1
BP 23
EP 36
DI 10.1002/ece3.1822
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000369164000002
PM 26811771
ER

PT J
AU Fritschie, KJ
   Olden, JD
AF Fritschie, Keith J.
   Olden, Julian D.
TI Disentangling the influences of mean body size and size structure on
   ecosystem functioning: an example of nutrient recycling by a non-native
   crayfish
SO ECOLOGY AND EVOLUTION
DT Article
DE Biodiversity-ecosystem function; Colorado River Basin; intraspecific
   variability; invasive; nonlinear averaging; Orconectes virilis
ID FRESH-WATER ECOSYSTEMS; ECOLOGICAL PROCESSES; PHENOTYPIC SELECTION;
   COMMUNITY STRUCTURE; JENSENS INEQUALITY; EMPIRICAL-MODELS; METABOLIC
   THEORY; EXCRETION RATES; CLIMATE-CHANGE; FISH
AB Body size is a fundamental functional trait that can be used to forecast individuals' responses to environmental change and their contribution to ecosystem functioning. However, information on the mean and variation of size distributions often confound one another when relating body size to aggregate functioning. Given that size-based metrics are used as indicators of ecosystem status, it is important to identify the specific aspects of size distributions that mediate ecosystem functioning. Our goal was to simultaneously account for the mean, variance, and shape of size distributions when relating body size to aggregate ecosystem functioning. We take advantage of habitat-specific differences in size distributions to estimate nutrient recycling by a non-native crayfish using mean-field and variance-incorporating approaches. Crayfishes often substantially influence ecosystem functioning through their omnivorous role in aquatic food webs. As predicted from Jensen's inequality, considering only the mean body size of crayfish overestimated aggregate effects on ecosystem functioning. This bias declined with mean body size such that mean-field and variance- incorporating estimates of ecosystem functioning were similar for samples at mean body sizes >7.5 g. At low mean body size, mean-field bias in ecosystem functioning mismatch predictions from Jensen's inequality, likely because of the increasing skewness of the size distribution. Our findings support the prediction that variance around the mean can alter the relationship between body size and ecosystem functioning, especially at low mean body size. However, methods to account for mean-field bias performed poorly in samples with highly skewed distributions, indicating that changes in the shape of the distribution, in addition to the variance, may confound mean-based estimates of ecosystem functioning. Given that many biological functions scale allometrically, explicitly defining and experimentally or statistically isolating the effects of the mean, variance, and shape of size distributions is necessary to begin generalizing relationships between animal body size and ecosystem functioning.
TC 5
Z9 5
SN 2045-7758
PD JAN
PY 2016
VL 6
IS 1
BP 159
EP 169
DI 10.1002/ece3.1852
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000369164000012
PM 26811781
ER

PT J
AU Parks, TP
   Quist, MC
   Pierce, CL
AF Parks, T. P.
   Quist, M. C.
   Pierce, C. L.
TI Anthropogenic Disturbance and Environmental Associations with Fish
   Assemblage Structure in Two Nonwadeable Rivers
SO RIVER RESEARCH AND APPLICATIONS
DT Article
DE fish assemblage structure; longitudinal patterns; discharge; dams
ID MULTIPLE SPATIAL SCALES; UPPER MISSISSIPPI RIVER; WADEABLE IOWA STREAMS;
   AMERICAN FRESH-WATER; GREAT-PLAINS RIVER; LOW-HEAD DAMS; BIOTIC
   INTEGRITY; LAND-USE; FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; HISTORICAL CHANGES
AB Nonwadeable rivers are unique ecosystems that support high levels of aquatic biodiversity, yet they have been greatly altered by human activities. Although riverine fish assemblages have been studied in the past, we still have an incomplete understanding of how fish assemblages respond to both natural and anthropogenic influences in large rivers. The purpose of this study was to evaluate associations between fish assemblage structure and reach-scale habitat, dam, and watershed land use characteristics. In the summers of 2011 and 2012, comprehensive fish and environmental data were collected from 33 reaches in the Iowa and Cedar rivers of eastern-central Iowa. Canonical correspondence analysis (CCA) was used to evaluate environmental relationships with species relative abundance, functional trait abundance (e.g. catch rate of tolerant species), and functional trait composition (e.g. percentage of tolerant species). On the basis of partial CCAs, reach-scale habitat, dam characteristics, and watershed land use features explained 25.0-81.1%, 6.2-25.1%, and 5.8-47.2% of fish assemblage variation, respectively. Although reach-scale, dam, and land use factors contributed to overall assemblage structure, the majority of fish assemblage variation was constrained by reach-scale habitat factors. Specifically, mean annual discharge was consistently selected in nine of the 11 CCA models and accounted for the majority of explained fish assemblage variance by reach-scale habitat. This study provides important insight on the influence of anthropogenic disturbances across multiple spatial scales on fish assemblages in large river systems. Copyright (c) 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1535-1459
EI 1535-1467
PD JAN
PY 2016
VL 32
IS 1
BP 66
EP 84
DI 10.1002/rra.2844
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Water Resources
UT WOS:000368011400004
ER

PT J
AU Thomas, MK
   Kremer, CT
   Litchman, E
AF Thomas, Mridul K.
   Kremer, Colin T.
   Litchman, Elena
TI Environment and evolutionary history determine the global biogeography
   of phytoplankton temperature traits
SO GLOBAL ECOLOGY AND BIOGEOGRAPHY
DT Article
DE Adaptation; community assembly; environmental filtering; evolutionary
   constraint; functional traits; phytoplankton; selection; temperature;
   trait-environment relationships
ID FUNCTIONAL TRAITS; COMMUNITY ECOLOGY; CLIMATE-CHANGE; CYANOBACTERIAL
   DOMINANCE; GROWTH-RATES; PEG-MODEL; MARINE; ADAPTATION; ECTOTHERMS;
   ECOSYSTEM
AB Aim Ecological and evolutionary forces shape the functional traits of species within and across environments, generating biogeographical patterns in traits. We aimed to: (1) determine the extent to which temperature traits of phytoplankton are adapted to their local environment, and (2) detect and explain differences in patterns of adaptation between functional groups (reflecting evolutionary history) and across ecosystems (freshwater versus marine).
   Location We used laboratory-measured data on phytoplankton strains isolated from marine (76 degrees N to 75 degrees S) and freshwater ecosystems (80 degrees N to 78 degrees S).
   Methods We studied variation in five temperature traits: optimum temperature for growth (T-opt), maximum and minimum persistence temperature (T-max, T-min), temperature niche width and maximum growth rate, estimated in 439 strains from over 200 species. We tested whether these traits change along environmental temperature gradients (across latitude and ecosystems) and also investigated differences in trait-environment relationships related to evolutionary history (functional group identity). We used mixed models to evaluate our hypotheses while accounting for intraspecific variation.
   Results We identified three patterns caused by adaptation and community assembly: (1) T-opt, T-max and T-min decline sharply with latitude; (2) T-opt, T-max and T-min are similar across all functional groups at the equator, where temperature variation is low; and (3) T-opt and T-max are higher in freshwater locations than marine locations at similar latitudes. Additionally, evolutionary history explained substantial variation in all traits: functional groups differ strongly in their niche widths and maximum growth rates, as well as their T-opt, T-max, and T-min relationships with latitude.
   Main conclusions Globally, phytoplankton temperature traits are well adapted to local conditions, changing across ecosystems and latitude. Functional groups differ strongly in their patterns of adaptation: traits are similar in hot tropical environments, but diverge at temperate latitudes. These differences reflect two possible evolutionary constraints: cyanobacterial inability to adapt to low temperatures and differences in nutrient requirements between groups.
OI Thomas, Mridul/0000-0002-5089-5610
TC 24
Z9 24
SN 1466-822X
EI 1466-8238
PD JAN
PY 2016
VL 25
IS 1
BP 75
EP 86
DI 10.1111/geb.12387
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Physical Geography
UT WOS:000367728900009
ER

PT J
AU Alahuhta, J
   Luukinoja, J
   Tukiainen, H
   Hjort, J
AF Alahuhta, Janne
   Luukinoja, Jonna
   Tukiainen, Helena
   Hjort, Jan
TI Importance of spatial scale in structuring emergent lake vegetation
   across environmental gradients and scales: GIS-based approach
SO ECOLOGICAL INDICATORS
DT Article
DE Aquatic macrophytes; CORINE; Finland; Functional traits; Helophytes;
   Lakes; Overgrowth; Normalized Difference Vegetation Index; Tasseled Cap
   Greenness
ID FRESH-WATER MACROPHYTES; LAND-USE; COMMUNITY COMPOSITION; AQUATIC
   MACROPHYTES; BOREAL LAKES; SPECIES RICHNESS; METHANE EFFLUX; PATTERNS;
   CLIMATE; COVER
AB Geographical information systems (GIS)-based approaches support the traditional empirical assessment and monitoring measures to indicate large-scale environmental alterations caused by global change. We examined the relationship between cover patterns of emergent aquatic plants derived from the CORINE land cover database, and environmental gradients (i.e. lake, climate and land cover and soil variables) at four different buffer scales (50 m, 100 m, 300 m and 500 m) in 408 boreal lakes in Finland. Our main statistical methods were hierarchical partitioning (HP), generalized linear models (GLM) and variation partitioning (VP).
   Based on correlations and HP, the importance of different buffer zones varied between environmental variables in explaining the vegetation cover. Our study also demonstrated that landscape productivity variables (i.e. Normalized Difference Vegetation Index and Tasseled Cap Greenness) strongly structured the vegetation cover. These productivity variables proved to be proxies for agricultural land and nutrient leaching from terrestrial areas to water, but they were also associated with shading of riparian vegetation. In the VP, land cover and soil variable groups influenced emergent vegetation cover the most, followed by lake and, lastly, by climate variables.
   Our work emphasized the importance of spatial scale in structuring freshwater assemblages that should be taken into account in ecological research and bioassessment. The use of a single spatial scale may lead to flawed results on the relevance of various environmental gradients on freshwater assemblages. Moreover, our study showed that satellite-based productivity variables can be powerful proxies for the amount of nutrients eventually entering aquatic ecosystems from adjacent terrestrial areas. The GIS-based approach used here provided an ecologically sound and cost-efficient early-warning estimation of vegetation overgrowth in boreal lakes. This approach is applicable to other regions with similar land cover data sets. (C) 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
OI Alahuhta, Janne/0000-0001-5514-9361; Hjort, Jan/0000-0002-4521-2088
TC 4
Z9 6
SN 1470-160X
EI 1872-7034
PD JAN
PY 2016
VL 60
BP 1164
EP 1172
DI 10.1016/j.eco1ind.2015.08.045
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000367407000116
ER

PT J
AU Schaum, CE
   Rost, B
   Collins, S
AF Schaum, C-Elisa
   Rost, Bjoern
   Collins, Sinead
TI Environmental stability affects phenotypic evolution in a globally
   distributed marine picoplankton
SO ISME JOURNAL
DT Article
ID OCEAN ACIDIFICATION; COCCOLITHOPHORE; PHYTOPLANKTON; ADAPTATION;
   PLASTICITY; RESPONSES; MICROBES; ORGANISM; PLANKTON; GROWTH
AB Marine phytoplankton can evolve rapidly when confronted with aspects of climate change because of their large population sizes and fast generation times. Despite this, the importance of environment fluctuations, a key feature of climate change, has received little attention-selection experiments with marine phytoplankton are usually carried out in stable environments and use single or few representatives of a species, genus or functional group. Here we investigate whether and by how much environmental fluctuations contribute to changes in ecologically important phytoplankton traits such as C:N ratios and cell size, and test the variability of changes in these traits within the globally distributed species Ostreococcus. We have evolved 16 physiologically distinct lineages of Ostreococcus at stable high CO2 (1031 +/- 87 mu atm CO2, SH) and fluctuating high CO2 (1012 +/- 244 mu atm CO2, FH) for 400 generations. We find that although both fluctuation and high CO2 drive evolution, FH-evolved lineages are smaller, have reduced C:N ratios and respond more strongly to further increases in CO2 than do SH-evolved lineages. This indicates that environmental fluctuations are an important factor to consider when predicting how the characteristics of future phytoplankton populations will have an impact on biogeochemical cycles and higher trophic levels in marine food webs.
OI Collins, Sinead/0000-0003-3856-4285; Rost, Bjorn/0000-0001-5452-5505
TC 21
Z9 21
SN 1751-7362
EI 1751-7370
PD JAN
PY 2016
VL 10
IS 1
BP 75
EP 84
DI 10.1038/ismej.2015.102
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Microbiology
UT WOS:000366671300009
PM 26125683
ER

PT J
AU Pangjanda, S
   Pramual, P
AF Pangjanda, Sirinapa
   Pramual, Pairot
TI Trait-based and phylogenetic community ecology of black flies (Diptera:
   Simuliidae) in tropical streams of Thailand
SO HYDROBIOLOGIA
DT Article
DE Aquatic insects; Black fly; Community structure; Simuliidae; Simulium
ID FLY DIPTERA; DISTRIBUTION PATTERNS; SPATIAL-DISTRIBUTION;
   SPECIES-DIVERSITY; LARVAE DIPTERA; LABRAL FAN; BODY-SIZE; ASSEMBLAGES;
   EVOLUTION; HABITAT
AB A primary aim of community ecology is to determine mechanisms that shape community structure. In this study, we used trait-based and phylogenetic community ecology approaches to determine the factors underlying the species assemblage of black fly larvae in tropical streams of Thailand. Ecological data were obtained from 150 collections. Morphological traits were measured from 35 species. The phylogenetic relationship of these species was inferred from cytochrome c oxidase I, II, and 18S rRNA/ITS1 sequences. Phylogeny-based community analyses indicated that species in the community did not skew toward phylogenetic clustering or overdispersion. However, the trait-based community structure analysis based on labral fan morphology revealed that species in most (>78%) communities were more similar morphologically than expected by chance. As labral fan morphology is strongly related to habitat exploitation, it is considered that habitat filtering is a major factor shaping community structure of black fly larvae in tropical streams of Thailand.
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 0018-8158
EI 1573-5117
PD JAN
PY 2016
VL 763
IS 1
BP 345
EP 356
DI 10.1007/s10750-015-2389-8
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000365726600026
ER

PT J
AU Chattopadhyay, D
   Zuschin, M
   Tomasovych, A
AF Chattopadhyay, Devapriya
   Zuschin, Martin
   Tomasovych, Adam
TI How effective are ecological traits against drilling predation? Insights
   from recent bivalve assemblages of the northern Red Sea
SO PALAEOGEOGRAPHY PALAEOCLIMATOLOGY PALAEOECOLOGY
DT Article
DE Bivalve prey; Anti-predatory defense; Escalation; Life habit; Naticidae;
   Muricidae; Red Sea
ID MESOZOIC MARINE REVOLUTION; POLINICES-PULCHELLUS GASTROPODA; NATICIDAE
   RISSO 1826; LUNATIA-HEROS SAY; FOSSIL RECORD; SHELL REPAIR; CORAL-REEFS;
   FUNCTIONAL-MORPHOLOGY; DIVERSITY PATTERNS; NUCELLA-LAMELLOSA
AB Biotic interactions, especially predation, have drawn considerable attention in recent times as an important agent of natural selection. Drilling predation is often used as a model system by paleobiologists to evaluate evolutionary and ecological effects of such predatory interaction on the composition of molluscan communities. Using drilling frequencies, it is possible to test quantitatively specific predictions that postulate the effectiveness of ecological traits against predation in present-day environments. The high frequency of drilling (OF) in a diverse recent bivalve assemblage from shallow water environments of the northern Red Sea enables us to test such evolutionary hypotheses, predicting low DF in large-sized bivalves, in infaunal bivalves, in siphonate and mobile bivalves, lower OF in bysally attached than in other epifaunal bivalves, and high OF in bivalves occurring in shallow habitats. We evaluate these predictions on the basis of more than 15,000 bivalve specimens collected at stations with meter-scale spatial resolution using three different methods to calculate DF, namely 1) per-species perstation DF, 2) per-species DF by pooling all stations, and 3) per-station OF by pooling all species. The results are not always consistent among these three methods. Among morphological attributes, we found size and shape of a species to be a good predictor of drilling frequency. However, life habit shows a pattern contrary to our prediction because infaunal groups show the highest DR Although we did not find any significant correlation between predator abundance and DF at small spatial (station) scales, the dominance of naticid gastropods and low abundance of muricid gastropods at regional scales can explain the much higher DF observed in infauna than in epifauna. Characteristics of the siphon or mobility did not always play a major role in dictating the DF. Attachment type of epifauna does not always show a predictable pattern in deterring drilling predation; however, bysally attached bivalves sometimes show a slightly lower DF compared to cemented bivalves. Although water depth has no significant effect on DF, it might be influenced by the relatively narrow depth range of the stations. We did not find significant variation in DF between groups adapted to different habitats (i.e, substrate types); however, DF seems to differ between groups with different feeding mode. Our study demonstrates that some ecological traits (such as infaunalization or predator avoidance by choosing deeper habitat) that are claimed to be anti-predatory, do not offer effective defense against drilling predation in present-day environments a result consistent with the idea of ever escalating predator-prey dynamics. (C) 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
RI Zuschin, Martin/M-9951-2016
OI Zuschin, Martin/0000-0002-5235-0198; Tomasovych,
   Adam/0000-0002-0471-9480; Chattopadhyay, Devapriya/0000-0002-9102-9313
TC 5
Z9 5
SN 0031-0182
EI 1872-616X
PD DEC 15
PY 2015
VL 440
BP 659
EP 670
DI 10.1016/j.palaeo.2015.09.047
SC Physical Geography; Geology; Paleontology
UT WOS:000366539700051
ER

PT J
AU Yvon-Durocher, G
   Allen, AP
   Cellamare, M
   Dossena, M
   Gaston, KJ
   Leitao, M
   Montoya, JM
   Reuman, DC
   Woodward, G
   Trimmer, M
AF Yvon-Durocher, Gabriel
   Allen, Andrew P.
   Cellamare, Maria
   Dossena, Matteo
   Gaston, Kevin J.
   Leitao, Maria
   Montoya, Jose M.
   Reuman, Daniel C.
   Woodward, Guy
   Trimmer, Mark
TI Five Years of Experimental Warming Increases the Biodiversity and
   Productivity of Phytoplankton
SO PLOS BIOLOGY
DT Article
ID LATITUDINAL DIVERSITY GRADIENT; TEMPERATURE-DEPENDENCE; BODY-SIZE;
   MARINE-PHYTOPLANKTON; TROPHIC INTERACTIONS; STOCHASTIC-PROCESSES;
   FUNCTIONAL-RESPONSE; METABOLIC BALANCE; SPECIES TURNOVER; FOOD-WEB
AB Phytoplankton are key components of aquatic ecosystems, fixing CO2 from the atmosphere through photosynthesis and supporting secondary production, yet relatively little is known about how future global warming might alter their biodiversity and associated ecosystem functioning. Here, we explore how the structure, function, and biodiversity of a planktonic metacommunity was altered after five years of experimental warming. Our outdoor mesocosm experiment was open to natural dispersal from the regional species pool, allowing us to explore the effects of experimental warming in the context of metacommunity dynamics. Warming of 4 degrees C led to a 67% increase in the species richness of the phytoplankton, more evenly-distributed abundance, and higher rates of gross primary productivity. Warming elevated productivity indirectly, by increasing the biodiversity and biomass of the local phytoplankton communities. Warming also systematically shifted the taxonomic and functional trait composition of the phytoplankton, favoring large, colonial, inedible phytoplankton taxa, suggesting stronger top-down control, mediated by zooplankton grazing played an important role. Overall, our findings suggest that temperature can modulate species coexistence, and through such mechanisms, global warming could, in some cases, increase the species richness and productivity of phytoplankton communities.
OI Montoya, Jose M./0000-0002-6676-7592
TC 36
Z9 36
SN 1545-7885
PD DEC
PY 2015
VL 13
IS 12
AR e1002324
DI 10.1371/journal.pbio.1002324
SC Biochemistry & Molecular Biology; Life Sciences & Biomedicine - Other
   Topics
UT WOS:000368443000016
PM 26680314
ER

PT J
AU Ruiz-Gonzalez, C
   Nino-Garcia, JP
   Lapierre, JF
   del Giorgio, PA
AF Ruiz-Gonzalez, Clara
   Nino-Garcia, Juan Pablo
   Lapierre, Jean-Francois
   del Giorgio, Paul A.
TI The quality of organic matter shapes the functional biogeography of
   bacterioplankton across boreal freshwater ecosystems
SO GLOBAL ECOLOGY AND BIOGEOGRAPHY
DT Article
DE Aquatic bacterial communities; biodiversity-function; boreal ecosystems;
   DOM composition; functional biogeography; large-scale spatial patterns;
   trait-based approaches.
ID COMMUNITY COMPOSITION; MICROBIAL DIVERSITY; FLUVIAL NETWORKS; CARBON;
   LAKES; SCALE; FLUXES; METABOLISM; MAGNITUDE; EMISSIONS
AB Aim The need to go beyond taxonomy to understand patterns in microbial function has led to an increased use of trait-based approaches, yet we know little about how microbial functional traits vary across large-scale environmental gradients in natural ecosystems. Here, we apply a trait-based approach to explore the large-scale variability in the trait structure underlying the processing of dissolved organic matter (DOM) by boreal bacterioplankton communities, as well as its regulation and links to taxonomic composition.
   Location Samples were collected from 296 rivers and lakes across five regions in northern Quebec (Canada), which span large gradients in environmental, climatic and geographical properties typical of the boreal zone.
   Methods We used the metabolic profiles obtained with Biolog EcoPlates as an imprint of the trait structure underlying bacterial processing of DOM, and Illumina sequencing of the 16SrRNA gene to characterize the taxonomic composition of these bacterial assemblages. The resulting spatial patterns were compared with an array of climatic, landscape and limnological properties varying at the landscape scale.
   Results Despite a clear regional segregation of the sampled sites based on environmental variables, the trait structure of boreal bacteria did not show any regional or ecosystem-specific patterns, but rather was linked to a gradient of quality of DOM. Community trait configurations diverged progressively with decreasing terrestrial influence, probably due to local processes that transform and diversify the available pool of DOM. This DOM quality gradient did not explain the taxonomic biogeography of these communities, which was controlled by a different set of environmental factors.
   Main conclusions The functional biogeography of boreal bacterioplankton is driven by the nature of the DOM pool, and particularly by the influence of terrestrial DOM. The lack of coherence between functional and taxonomic biogeographies implies that the environmental controls of freshwater bacterial performance cannot be directly inferred from spatial patterns in taxonomic composition.
RI Ruiz-Gonzalez, Clara/K-7782-2017
OI Nino-Garcia, Juan Pablo/0000-0003-1610-3998; Ruiz Gonzalez,
   Clara/0000-0003-3568-4943; Lapierre, Jean-Francois/0000-0001-5862-7955
TC 19
Z9 19
SN 1466-822X
EI 1466-8238
PD DEC
PY 2015
VL 24
IS 12
BP 1487
EP 1498
DI 10.1111/geb.12356
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Physical Geography
UT WOS:000367668000012
ER

PT J
AU Monro, K
   Marshall, DJ
AF Monro, Keyne
   Marshall, Dustin J.
TI The biogeography of fertilization mode in the sea
SO GLOBAL ECOLOGY AND BIOGEOGRAPHY
DT Article
DE Developmental mode; fertilization mode; functional biogeography; life
   histories; marine invertebrates; metazoans; reproductive strategies
ID LIFE-HISTORY EVOLUTION; MARINE-INVERTEBRATES; COMPARATIVE BIOLOGY;
   DEVELOPMENTAL MODE; LARVAL DISPERSAL; OFFSPRING SIZE; PARENTAL CARE;
   COMPETITION; VIVIPARITY; STRATEGIES
AB Aim Knowledge of the biogeography of life histories is central to understanding and predicting the impacts of global change on key functional traits that shape species distributions and transcend taxonomic boundaries. Whether species are internal or external fertilizers is a fundamental aspect of reproductive diversity in the sea, and has profound ecological and evolutionary consequences. However, geographic variation in this trait and the factors that potentially drive it (e.g. transitions in associated life-history traits, ecological conditions that favour one mode over the other or the evolutionary history of species) remain poorly characterized.
   Location Oceans world-wide.
   Methods We collated life-history data (modes of fertilization and development), geographic data and biophysical data (sea-surface temperatures and food availability) for 1532 marine species spanning 17 invertebrate phyla. We used standard and phylogenetic logistic regressions to evaluate latitudinal gradients in fertilization mode, plus their interactions with development (transitions from planktonic to aplanktonic development, or fromfeeding to non-feeding larvae) and taxonomy. We also explored the dependence of fertilization mode on biophysical variables to understand how ecology potentially contributes to geographic variation in this trait.
   Results Fertilization mode often varies predictably with latitude, but the exact nature of this relationship depends on developmental mode and the phylum under consideration. Some commonalities were evident, however, with the likelihood of internal fertilization declining at higher latitudes for Annelida and Echinodermata with aplanktonic development, but increasing at higher latitudes for Cnidaria and Porifera with non-feeding, planktonic larvae. Synergistic effects of temperature and food availability may potentially shape some of these patterns.
   Main conclusions There are latitudinal gradients in fertilization mode in the sea. The variation among phyla and developmental modes, however, is a complexity that is unexplained by existing theory. Combined effects of recent adaptation and deeper phylogenetic history have probably shaped this systematic variation in the reproductive ecology of marine organisms.
RI Marshall, Dustin/C-3450-2016
TC 8
Z9 8
SN 1466-822X
EI 1466-8238
PD DEC
PY 2015
VL 24
IS 12
BP 1499
EP 1509
DI 10.1111/geb.12358
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Physical Geography
UT WOS:000367668000013
ER

PT J
AU Baattrup-Pedersen, A
   Gothe, E
   Larsen, SE
   O'Hare, M
   Birk, S
   Riis, T
   Friberg, N
AF Baattrup-Pedersen, Annette
   Gothe, Emma
   Larsen, Soren E.
   O'Hare, Matthew
   Birk, Sebastian
   Riis, Tenna
   Friberg, Nikolai
TI Plant trait characteristics vary with size and eutrophication in
   European lowland streams
SO JOURNAL OF APPLIED ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE assessment; eutrophication; functional traits; growth form; macrophyte;
   nutrients; plant trait characteristics; river; vegetation; Water
   Framework Directive
ID FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; WATER-QUALITY; LAND-USE; AQUATIC MACROPHYTES;
   ECOSYSTEM PROPERTIES; SPECIES TRAITS; FRESH-WATER; NEW-ZEALAND; RIVER;
   PHOSPHORUS
AB Previous studies investigating community-level relationships between plant functional trait characteristics and stream environmental characteristics remain scarce. Here, we used community-weighted means to identify how plant traits link to lowland stream typology and how agricultural intensity in the catchment affects trait composition. We analysed plant trait characteristics in 772 European lowland streams to test the following two hypotheses: (i) trait characteristics differ between plant communities in small and medium-sized streams, reflecting adaptations to different habitat characteristics, and (ii) trait characteristics vary with the intensity of agricultural land use in the stream catchment, mediated either directly by an increase in productive species or indirectly by an increase in species that efficiently intercept and utilize light. We found that the communities in small streams were characterized by a higher abundance of light-demanding species growing from single apical meristems, reproducing by seeds and rooted to the bottom with floating and/or heterophyllous leaves, whereas the community in medium-sized streams was characterized by a higher abundance of productive species growing from multi-apical and basal growth meristems forming large canopies. We also found indications that community trait characteristics were affected by eutrophication. We did not find enhanced abundance of productive species with an increasing proportion of agriculture in the catchments. Instead, we found an increase in the abundance of species growing from apical and multi-apical growth meristems as well as in the abundance of species tolerant of low light availability. The increase in the abundance of species possessing these traits likely reflects different strategies to obtain greater efficiency in light interception and utilization in nutrient-enriched environments.Synthesis and applications. Our findings challenge the general assumption of the EU Water Framework Directive compliant assessment systems that plant community patterns in streams reflect the nutrient preference of the community. Instead, light availability and the ability to improve interception and utilization appeared to be of key importance for community composition in agricultural lowland streams. We therefore suggest moving from existing approaches building on species-specific preference values for nutrients to determine the level of nutrient impairment to trait-based approaches that provide insight into the biological mechanisms underlying the changes. We recommend that existing systems are critically appraised in the context of the findings of this study.
   Our findings challenge the general assumption of the EU Water Framework Directive compliant assessment systems that plant community patterns in streams reflect the nutrient preference of the community. Instead, light availability and the ability to improve interception and utilization appeared to be of key importance for community composition in agricultural lowland streams. We therefore suggest moving from existing approaches building on species-specific preference values for nutrients to determine the level of nutrient impairment to trait-based approaches that provide insight into the biological mechanisms underlying the changes. We recommend that existing systems are critically appraised in the context of the findings of this study.
RI O'Hare, Matthew/F-3648-2011; Birk, Sebastian/B-3125-2013; Riis,
   Tenna/K-8346-2013
OI Riis, Tenna/0000-0003-2501-4444; Birk, Sebastian/0000-0002-2597-8692;
   Larsen, Soren Erik/0000-0001-8428-2065
TC 7
Z9 8
SN 0021-8901
EI 1365-2664
PD DEC
PY 2015
VL 52
IS 6
BP 1617
EP 1628
DI 10.1111/1365-2664.12509
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000367095400023
ER

PT J
AU Best, RJ
   Stone, MN
   Stachowicz, JJ
AF Best, Rebecca J.
   Stone, Michelle N.
   Stachowicz, John J.
TI Predicting consequences of climate change for ecosystem functioning:
   variation across trophic levels, species and individuals
SO DIVERSITY AND DISTRIBUTIONS
DT Article
DE acclimation; algae; distribution; grazers; plasticity; population
   growth; temperature
ID EELGRASS ZOSTERA-MARINA; BOTTOM-UP CONTROL; BIOTIC INTERACTIONS;
   TOP-DOWN; WARMING STRENGTHENS; GLOBAL ANALYSIS; FOOD-WEB; TEMPERATURE;
   COMMUNITIES; ADAPTATION
AB Aim Maintenance of ecosystem function under climate change may depend on variation in the way species within functional guilds and individuals within species respond to changes in temperature. What level of variation among and within species do we need to understand, and is it predictable from distribution and trait data?
   Location Northern California, USA.
   Methods We used a mesocosm experiment and a set of feeding trials to test the ability of a guild of marine invertebrate grazers to control benthic algal blooms along a local temperature gradient. We investigate links between the locally disjunct distributions of these species, their temperature tolerance traits and the temperature dependence of their population growth and grazing rates.
   Results We found that the effect of increased temperature on population growth rates is independent of species interactions, but strongly species specific. This variation among herbivores is only partly predictable from differences in species distributions and traits, but translated into large differences in their ability to control macroalgae. Further, these species effects were amplified at warmer temperatures. Finally, we found evidence for a strong response to temperature in the feeding rates of the most important consumer over the course of the experiment, resulting in almost as much variation in grazing rates within one species as the average difference between species.
   Main conclusions These results illustrate the importance of understanding the variation in responses to temperature among species within a trophic level, among populations within key species and potentially within populations over time. However, this variation is not easily predicted. Further research is needed to uncover links between individuals' thermal optima and their current and future temperature niche.
RI Best, Rebecca/D-2934-2013
OI Best, Rebecca/0000-0003-2103-064X
TC 10
Z9 10
SN 1366-9516
EI 1472-4642
PD DEC
PY 2015
VL 21
IS 12
BP 1364
EP 1374
DI 10.1111/ddi.12367
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000364334100001
ER

PT J
AU Fuiman, LA
   Perez, KO
AF Fuiman, Lee A.
   Perez, Kestrel O.
TI Metabolic programming mediated by an essential fatty acid alters body
   composition and survival skills of a marine fish
SO PROCEEDINGS OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY B-BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES
DT Article
DE transgenerational effects; nutrition; development; performance;
   docosahexaenoic acid
ID DRUM SCIAENOPS-OCELLATUS; DOCOSAHEXAENOIC ACID; BRAIN-DEVELOPMENT;
   NUTRITION; FETAL; DIET; IMBALANCE; FEMALES; SYSTEMS; HABITS
AB Metabolic programming occurs when variations in nutrition during a specific developmental window result in long-term metabolic effects. It has been studied almost exclusively in humans and other mammals but never in an ecological context. Here, we report metabolic programming and its functional consequences in a marine fish, red drum. We demonstrate that maternal provisioning of eggs with an essential fatty acid, docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), varies with DHA content of the maternal diet. When offspring are reared on a DHA-replete diet, whole-body DHA content of offspring depends upon the amount of DHA that was in the egg. We further demonstrate that whole-body DHA content is correlated with traits related to offspring fitness (escape responses, routine swimming, growth, and survival). DHA content of red drum eggs produced in nature is in the range where the effects of metabolic programming are most pronounced. Our findings indicate that during a brief developmental window, DHA plays a role in establishing the metabolic capacity for its own uptake or storage, with protracted and possibly permanent effects on ecologically important survival skills of individuals and important implications for dynamics of populations and food webs.
RI Fuiman, Lee/L-9514-2017
OI Fuiman, Lee/0000-0003-2667-2684
TC 6
Z9 6
SN 0962-8452
EI 1471-2954
PD NOV 22
PY 2015
VL 282
IS 1819
AR 20151414
DI 10.1098/rspb.2015.1414
SC Life Sciences & Biomedicine - Other Topics; Environmental Sciences &
   Ecology; Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000367562500021
PM 26582018
ER

PT J
AU Ciccarelli, D
AF Ciccarelli, Daniela
TI Mediterranean coastal dune vegetation: Are disturbance and stress the
   key selective forces that drive the psammophilous succession?
SO ESTUARINE COASTAL AND SHELF SCIENCE
DT Article
DE coastal vegetation; community-weighted mean (CWM); CSR theory; NMDS;
   plant adaptation; plant functional types (PFTs)
ID FUNCTIONAL TRAITS WORLDWIDE; PLANT-COMMUNITIES; SYSTEMS; ADAPTATIONS;
   STRATEGIES; DIVERSITY; CLASSIFICATION; MORPHOLOGY; ECOSYSTEMS;
   PLASTICITY
AB Plant communities of coastal dunes are distributed along a characteristic sea-inland gradient. Generally, there is a shift from annual and short height species with small leaves in the initial successional stages to perennial tall shrubs with tough leaves in later phases. Assessing the community-weighted mean (CWM) trait values is used in plant ecology to describe ecosystem properties especially during succession. In particular, CSR (Competitive, Stress-tolerant, and Ruderal strategy) classification allows us to explore community functional shifts in terms of disturbance, stress and competition selective forces. The functional basis of the psammophilous succession was studied based on the following questions: (1) Can we circumscribe different functional types among plant species of Mediterranean coastal dunes? (2) How do CWM trait values vary along the environmental sea-inland gradient? (3) What is the relative importance of competition, stress and disturbance in the processes of plant community assembling? (4) Can we postulate that along primary successions there is generally a shift from ruderality to stress-tolerance? An explorative analysis of functional groups was performed by Non-Metric Multidimensional Scaling (NMDS) analysing nine morpho-functional traits measured for 45 taxa from 880 dune plots localised in Tuscany (central Italy, Europe). NMDS ordination showed a scattered distribution of psammophytes that could not be delimited in precise plant functional types. The first NMDS axis has been interpreted as a leaf economics axis because it was correlated to leaf area (LA) and leaf dry matter content (LDMC), while the second one was a plant size axis because of its correlation with canopy height. Along the sea-inland gradient, pioneer plant communities of upper beach were dominated by ruderals (with the lowest values of LDMC and specific leaf area - SLA), well-adapted to the harsh environmental conditions of coastal dunes. More distant from the sea, where ecological conditions were less extreme, late-successional communities of backdunes were characterised by the prevalence of stress-tolerance. This study suggested that psammophytes have evolved not a single but multiple adaptive strategies showing a high degree of functional diversity and complexity. Moreover, CSR classification supported the hypothesis of a functional shift from R-strategists in early successional stages to S-strategists in late-successional communities along a primary succession. (C) 2015 Published by Elsevier Ltd.
TC 19
Z9 21
SN 0272-7714
EI 1096-0015
PD NOV 5
PY 2015
VL 165
BP 247
EP 253
DI 10.1016/j.ecss.2015.05.023
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000367119500028
ER

PT J
AU Easson, CG
   Matterson, KO
   Freeman, CJ
   Archer, SK
   Thacker, RW
AF Easson, Cole G.
   Matterson, Kenan O.
   Freeman, Christopher J.
   Archer, Stephanie K.
   Thacker, Robert W.
TI Variation in species diversity and functional traits of sponge
   communities near human populations in Bocas del Toro, Panama
SO PEERJ
DT Article
DE Community ecology; Microbial symbionts; Photosynthesis; Anthropogenic
   influences; Porifera
ID CARIBBEAN CORAL-REEF; PHASE-SHIFTS; MARINE SPONGES; PHYLOGENETIC
   INFERENCE; MICROBIAL COMMUNITIES; ALTERNATIVE STATES; FLORIDA-KEYS;
   ABUNDANCE; ECOSYSTEMS; NITROGEN
AB Recent studies have renewed interest in sponge ecology by emphasizing the functional importance of sponges in a broad array of ecosystem services. Many critically important habitats occupied by sponges face chronic stressors that might lead to alterations in their diversity, relatedness, and functional attributes. We addressed whether proximity to human activity might be a significant factor in structuring sponge community composition, as well as potential functional roles, by monitoring sponge diversity and abundance at two structurally similar sites that vary in distance to areas of high coastal development in Bocas Del Toro, Panama. We surveyed sponge communities at each site using belt transects and differences between two sites were compared using the following variables: (1) sponge species richness, Shannon diversity, and inverse Simpson's diversity; (2) phylogenetic diversity; (3) taxonomic and phylogenetic beta diversity; (4) trait diversity and dissimilarity; and (5) phylogenetic and trait patterns in community structure. We observed significantly higher sponge diversity at Punta Caracol, the site most distant from human development (similar to 5 km). Although phylogenetic diversity was lower at Saigon Bay, the site adjacent to a large village including many houses, businesses, and an airport, the sites did not exhibit significantly different patterns of phylogenetic relatedness in species composition. However, each site had a distinct taxonomic and phylogenetic composition (beta diversity). In addition, the sponge community at Saigon included a higher relative abundance of sponges with high microbial abundance and high chlorophyll a concentration, whereas the community at Punta Caracol had a more even distribution of these traits, yielding a significant difference in functional trait diversity between sites. These results suggest that lower diversity and potentially altered community function might be associated with proximity to human populations. This study highlights the importance of evaluating functional traits and phylogenetic diversity in addition to common diversity metrics when assessing potential environmental impacts on benthic communities.
OI Archer, Stephanie/0000-0002-1476-607X
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 2167-8359
PD NOV 5
PY 2015
VL 3
AR e1385
DI 10.7717/peerj.1385
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000365802900007
PM 26587347
ER

PT J
AU Alexander, H
   Rouco, M
   Haley, ST
   Wilson, ST
   Karl, DM
   Dyhrman, ST
AF Alexander, Harriet
   Rouco, Monica
   Haley, Sheean T.
   Wilson, Samuel T.
   Karl, David M.
   Dyhrman, Sonya T.
TI Functional group-specific traits drive phytoplankton dynamics in the
   oligotrophic ocean
SO PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES OF THE UNITED STATES OF
   AMERICA
DT Article
DE metatranscriptomics; phytoplankton; ecological traits; biogeochemistry;
   blooms
ID COCCOLITHOPHORE EMILIANIA-HUXLEYI; MICROBIAL COMMUNITY STRUCTURE; NORTH
   PACIFIC-OCEAN; GENE-EXPRESSION; METABOLIC BALANCE; STATION ALOHA;
   NITROGEN; SEA; ASSEMBLAGES; PHOSPHORUS
AB A diverse microbial assemblage in the ocean is responsible for nearly half of global primary production. It has been hypothesized and experimentally demonstrated that nutrient loading can stimulate blooms of large eukaryotic phytoplankton in oligotrophic systems. Although central to balancing biogeochemical models, knowledge of the metabolic traits that govern the dynamics of these bloom-forming phytoplankton is limited. We used eukaryotic metatranscriptomic techniques to identify the metabolic basis of functional group-specific traits that may drive the shift between net heterotrophy and autotrophy in the oligotrophic ocean. Replicated blooms were simulated by deep seawater (DSW) addition to mimic nutrient loading in the North Pacific Subtropical Gyre, and the transcriptional responses of phytoplankton functional groups were assayed. Responses of the diatom, haptophyte, and dinoflagellate functional groups in simulated blooms were unique, with diatoms and haptophytes significantly (95% confidence) shifting their quantitative metabolic fingerprint from the in situ condition, whereas dinoflagellates showed little response. Significantly differentially abundant genes identified the importance of colimitation by nutrients, metals, and vitamins in eukaryotic phytoplankton metabolism and bloom formation in this system. The variable transcript allocation ratio, used to quantify transcript reallocation following DSW amendment, differed for diatoms and haptophytes, reflecting the longstanding paradigm of phytoplankton r- and K-type growth strategies. Although the underlying metabolic potential of the large eukaryotic phytoplankton was consistently present, the lack of a bloom during the study period suggests a crucial dependence on physical and biogeochemical forcing, which are susceptible to alteration with changing climate.
OI Wilson, Samuel/0000-0002-7289-0909; Alexander,
   Harriet/0000-0003-1308-8008
TC 22
Z9 22
SN 0027-8424
PD NOV 3
PY 2015
VL 112
IS 44
BP E5972
EP E5979
DI 10.1073/pnas.1518165112
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000364164900012
PM 26460011
ER

PT J
AU Harvey, EL
   Bidle, KD
   Johnson, MD
AF Harvey, Elizabeth L.
   Bidle, Kay D.
   Johnson, Matthew D.
TI Consequences of strain variability and calcification in Emiliania
   huxleyi on microzooplankton grazing
SO JOURNAL OF PLANKTON RESEARCH
DT Article
DE grazing; microzooplankton; Emiliania huxleyi; intraspecific variability
ID DINOFLAGELLATE OXYRRHIS-MARINA; EXUDED DIMETHYLSULPHONIOPROPIONATE DMSP;
   COMMUNITY STRUCTURE; CHEMICAL DEFENSE; GROWTH-RATES;
   DIMETHYLSULFONIOPROPIONATE DMSP; PHYTOPLANKTON GROWTH;
   GYRODINIUM-DOMINANS; FEEDING-BEHAVIOR; BERING-SEA
AB Microzooplankton are the main consumers of marine phytoplankton. Intrinsic traits of phytoplankton can reduce grazing mortality, directly influencing phytoplankton population dynamics, food web ecology and biogeochemical cycling. We examined the impact of calcification in mediating the functional grazing response of three heterotrophic dinoflagellates, on the coccolithophore, Emiliania huxleyi. A variety of parameters, including predator grazing and growth rates, were examined over a 24-48 h period, at one to five prey concentrations for five isolates of E. huxleyi that fell along a gradient of calcification states. Significant differences in ingestion and clearance rate were strain-specific, and no apparent trends were observed in relation to calcification. However, predators had, on average, a 60% slower growth rate on calcified strains relative to naked strains; furthermore, gross growth efficiency was reduced when ingesting calcified strains. A growth rate model demonstrated a positive feedback from grazing interactions whereby decreased predator growth rate on calcified strains resulted in the accumulation of E. huxleyi. This study highlights the complexity involved in understanding the role of prey phenotype on grazing rates, and emphasizes the importance in considering morphological traits when deciphering predator-prey interactions in the plankton.
RI Johnson, Matthew/B-4344-2012
OI Johnson, Matthew/0000-0003-4853-2674
TC 9
Z9 9
SN 0142-7873
EI 1464-3774
PD NOV-DEC
PY 2015
VL 37
IS 6
BP 1137
EP 1148
DI 10.1093/plankt/fbv081
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000366936900006
ER

PT J
AU Calitz, W
   Potts, AJ
   Cowling, RM
AF Calitz, Wynand
   Potts, Alastair J.
   Cowling, Richard M.
TI Investigating species-level flammability across five biomes in the
   Eastern Cape, South Africa
SO SOUTH AFRICAN JOURNAL OF BOTANY
DT Article
DE Flammability; Functional traits; Fynbos; Grassland; Forest; Thicket;
   Nama-Karoo
ID SUBTROPICAL THICKET; FOREST PATCHES; COASTAL FYNBOS; FIRE REGIMES; LEAF
   TRAITS; STRATEGIES; EVOLUTION; EXPLANATION; EMERGENCE; PATTERNS
AB The causes and consequences of plant flammability are a contested issue. In fire-prone ecosystems, high flammability is invoked as a trait (in combination with fire-survival traits) that enhances reproductive success and reduces competition in the post-fire environment. On the other hand, flammability may be a consequence of other selective forces, for example, deterring herbivores. Here, we use a standardised method for estimating the flammabilities of 99 species distributed across five biomes in a small area of the southwestern Cape Floristic Region, South Africa. The fire-prone Fynbos and Grassland biomes included many highly flammable species, notably among graminoids and small-leaved shrubs with densely packed, fine twigs. However, Fynbos included many weakly flammable species. In the fire-free biomes (Forest, Nama-Karoo and Thicket), most species had low flammability, especially succulents. However, flammable species also occurred in all three biomes, including species with traits normally attributed to non-flammable species (e.g. large leaves sparsely arranged on coarse twigs). Since these biomes are fire-free, flammability in these species cannot be attributed to a fire-related selective regime. (C) 2015 SAAB. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
OI Potts, Alastair John/0000-0003-0919-7279
TC 6
Z9 6
SN 0254-6299
EI 1727-9321
PD NOV
PY 2015
VL 101
SI SI
BP 32
EP 39
DI 10.1016/j.sajb.2015.07.005
SC Plant Sciences
UT WOS:000366616400005
ER

PT J
AU Lefcheck, JS
   Duffy, JE
AF Lefcheck, Jonathan S.
   Duffy, J. Emmett
TI Multitrophic functional diversity predicts ecosystem functioning in
   experimental assemblages of estuarine consumers
SO ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE biodiversity; Chesapeake Bay; consumers; ecosystem functioning;
   estuaries; functional diversity; grazers; predators
ID MARINE FOOD-WEB; PREDATOR DIVERSITY; PHYLOGENETIC DIVERSITY; COMMUNITY
   COMPOSITION; SPECIES RICHNESS; TROPHIC LEVELS; BIODIVERSITY; PLANT;
   BIOMASS; CONSEQUENCES
AB The use of functional traits to explain how biodiversity affects ecosystem functioning has attracted intense interest, yet few studies have a priori altered functional diversity, especially in multitrophic communities. Here, we manipulated multivariate functional diversity of estuarine grazers and predators within multiple levels of species richness to test how species richness and functional diversity predicted ecosystem functioning in a multitrophic food web. Community functional diversity was a better predictor than species richness for the majority of ecosystem properties, based on generalized linear mixed-effects models. Combining inferences from eight traits into a single multivariate index increased prediction accuracy of these models relative to any individual trait. Structural equation modeling revealed that functional diversity of both grazers and predators was important in driving final biomass within trophic levels, with stronger effects observed for predators. We also show that different species drove different ecosystem responses, with evidence for both sampling effects and complementarity. Our study extends experimental investigations of functional trait diversity to a multilevel food web, and demonstrates that functional diversity can be more accurate and effective than species richness in predicting community biomass in a food web context.
OI Lefcheck, Jonathan/0000-0002-8787-1786
TC 27
Z9 27
SN 0012-9658
EI 1939-9170
PD NOV
PY 2015
VL 96
IS 11
BP 2973
EP 2983
DI 10.1890/14-1977.1
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000365521600012
PM 27070016
ER

PT J
AU Bayona, Y
   Roucaute, M
   Cailleaud, K
   Lagadic, L
   Basseres, A
   Caquet, T
AF Bayona, Yannick
   Roucaute, Marc
   Cailleaud, Kevin
   Lagadic, Laurent
   Basseres, Anne
   Caquet, Thierry
TI Effect of thiram and of a hydrocarbon mixture on freshwater
   macroinvertebrate communities in outdoor stream and pond mesocosms: II.
   Biological and ecological trait responses and leaf litter breakdown
SO ECOTOXICOLOGY
DT Article
DE Ecological risk assessment; Fungicide; Petroleum middle distillate;
   Direct and indirect effects; Functional diversity indices
ID ACTIVE INGREDIENT CHLORPYRIFOS; FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; EXPERIMENTAL
   DITCHES; AQUATIC ECOSYSTEMS; QUADRATIC ENTROPY; MULTIPLE TRAITS;
   INSECTICIDE; RICHNESS; DECOMPOSITION; SENSITIVITY
AB Higher-tier ecological risk assessment of chemicals often relies upon studies in dynamic and/or static mesocosms. Physico-chemical and hydrological properties of each type of mesocosm result in specific chemicals fate, community functioning, and potential recovery. In the present study, macroinvertebrate abundance- and biomass-weighted biological and ecological trait matrices were used to assess the effects of a dithiocarbamate fungicide, thiram (35 and 170 A mu g l(-1)), and of a petroleum middle distillate (0.01, 0.4, 2 and 20 mg l(-1)) in outdoor stream and pond mesocosms. Trait sensitivity was characterized using functional diversity indices and trait modality distributions to assess the influence of the type of experimental systems and the ability of traits to disentangle chemical-induced effects from temporal and stochastic variations. In addition, leaf litter breakdown was used as an integrative functional endpoint. Regardless to the substance, treatments had a direct effect on the functional structure of benthic macroinvertebrate communities in streams but not in ponds, suggesting that global functional responses to chemicals are system-specific. Although both substances had an effect in streams, differences were noticed in the nature of the affected traits suggesting that chemical mode of action plays a role in functional alterations. This was illustrated by the link between negative effects of chemical exposure on detritivorous taxa and reduced litter breakdown rate in streams. Therefore, characterisation of macroinvertebrate biological traits associated with the measurement of a functional process such as litter breakdown may provide a comprehensive understanding of the effects occurring in mesocosms exposed to organic chemicals.
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 0963-9292
EI 1573-3017
PD NOV
PY 2015
VL 24
IS 9
BP 1933
EP 1946
DI 10.1007/s10646-015-1531-8
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Toxicology
UT WOS:000365757900013
PM 26311171
ER

PT J
AU Marchante, H
   Marchante, E
   Freitas, H
   Hoffmann, JH
AF Marchante, Helia
   Marchante, Elizabete
   Freitas, Helena
   Hoffmann, John H.
TI Temporal changes in the impacts on plant communities of an invasive
   alien tree, Acacia longifolia
SO PLANT ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE Acacia longifolia; Coastal ecosystems; Indicator species analysis;
   Long-term impacts; Medium-term impacts; Plant traits; Invasion
   chronology; Species turn over
ID LONG-TERM IMPACTS; BIOLOGICAL INVASIONS; SPECIES RICHNESS; DUNE
   ECOSYSTEMS; SEED BANKS; DIVERSITY; MANAGEMENT; VEGETATION; SERVICES;
   RECOVERY
AB Studies on the impacts of invasive plants are common but most are short term and fail to consider the temporal context of invasion. The present work investigated particular invasions on two different time scales and asked: (1) Do the impacts of an invasive tree on plant communities change after decades of invasion? (2) Are patterns of impacts dynamic over a period of five years? (3) Can multiple parameters reveal impacts that are unnoticed when single-value parameters are measured alone? Contrasting plant communities (long invaded, recently invaded and non-invaded) of a Portuguese coastal dune were compared during a 5-year period to assess the impacts of the invasive Acacia longifolia. Plant diversity, richness, cover, plant traits, indicator species analysis, similarity between areas and species turnover were analysed to reveal spatial and temporal patterns of change. Native species richness declined in both invaded areas. As invasion time increased, species shared with natural habitats decreased along with native plant cover, diversity and species turnover. Many species typical of dunes were replaced by generalists and exotics species, and richness of species with some level of nitrophily increased, particularly in recently invaded areas. Life form spectrum was radically transformed in invaded areas with several small-sized life forms being replaced by one single microphanerophyte. Germination of A. longifolia was greatest in long invaded areas. Findings show that modification of plant communities intensifies with invasion time and that invasion promotes a diversity of structural and functional changes which are dynamic over a few years (medium-term scale) but which tend to stabilize after several decades (long-term scale). An analysis of parameters in combination revealed changes that were not apparent when the same parameters were considered separately.
RI Freitas, Helena/A-2803-2010; Marchante, Elizabete/D-3858-2011
OI Freitas, Helena/0000-0002-1907-9615; Marchante,
   Elizabete/0000-0003-1303-7489; Marchante, Helia/0000-0002-3247-5663
TC 22
Z9 24
SN 1385-0237
EI 1573-5052
PD NOV
PY 2015
VL 216
IS 11
BP 1481
EP 1498
DI 10.1007/s11258-015-0530-4
SC Plant Sciences; Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Forestry
UT WOS:000365170900001
ER

PT J
AU Tomas, F
   Martinez-Crego, B
   Hernan, G
   Santos, R
AF Tomas, Fiona
   Martinez-Crego, Begona
   Hernan, Gema
   Santos, Rui
TI Responses of seagrass to anthropogenic and natural disturbances do not
   equally translate to its consumers
SO GLOBAL CHANGE BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE climate change; CO2; ecological redundancy; eutrophication; grazing;
   isopod; ocean acidification; plant-herbivore interactions; response
   diversity; sea urchin
ID PLANT-HERBIVORE INTERACTIONS; POSIDONIA-OCEANICA; THALASSIA-TESTUDINUM;
   CYMODOCEA-NODOSA; CO2 ENRICHMENT; CLIMATE-CHANGE; ELEVATED CO2; MARINE
   HERBIVORES; ECOSYSTEMS; PATTERNS
AB Coastal communities are under threat from many and often co-occurring local (e.g., pollution, eutrophication) and global stressors (e.g., climate change), yet understanding the interactive and cumulative impacts of multiple stressors in ecosystem function is far from being accomplished. Ecological redundancy may be key for ecosystem resilience, but there are still many gaps in our understanding of interspecific differences within a functional group, particularly regarding response diversity, that is, whether members of a functional group respond equally or differently to anthropogenic stressors. Herbivores are critical in determining plant community structure and the transfer of energy up the food web. Human disturbances may alter the ecological role of herbivory by modifying the defense strategies of plants and thus the feeding patterns and performance of herbivores. We conducted a suite of experiments to examine the independent and interactive effects of anthropogenic (nutrient and CO2 additions) and natural (simulated herbivory) disturbances on a seagrass and its interaction with two common generalist consumers to understand how multiple disturbances can impact both a foundation species and a key ecological function (herbivory) and to assess the potential existence of response diversity to anthropogenic and natural changes in these systems. While all three disturbances modified seagrass defense traits, there were contrasting responses of herbivores to such plant changes. Both CO2 and nutrient additions influenced herbivore feeding behavior, yet while sea urchins preferred nutrient-enriched seagrass tissue (regardless of other experimental treatments), isopods were deterred by these same plant tissues. In contrast, carbon enrichment deterred sea urchins and attracted isopods, while simulated herbivory only influenced isopod feeding choice. These contrasting responses of herbivores to disturbance-induced changes in seagrass help to better understand the ecological functioning of seagrass ecosystems in the face of human disturbances and may have important implications regarding the resilience and conservation of these threatened ecosystems.
RI Santos, Rui/B-4168-2008; Algarve, CCMAR/C-2603-2018; Martinez-Crego,
   Begona/J-4090-2013
OI Santos, Rui/0000-0002-7861-4366; Martinez-Crego,
   Begona/0000-0002-9051-6961; HERNAN MARTINEZ, GEMA/0000-0002-0806-9729
TC 14
Z9 15
SN 1354-1013
EI 1365-2486
PD NOV
PY 2015
VL 21
IS 11
BP 4021
EP 4030
DI 10.1111/gcb.13024
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000364777200010
PM 26152761
ER

PT J
AU Cleary, DFR
   de Voogd, NJ
   Polonia, ARM
   Freitas, R
   Gomes, NCM
AF Cleary, Daniel F. R.
   de Voogd, Nicole J.
   Polonia, Ana R. M.
   Freitas, Rossana
   Gomes, Newton C. M.
TI Composition and Predictive Functional Analysis of Bacterial Communities
   in Seawater, Sediment and Sponges in the Spermonde Archipelago,
   Indonesia
SO MICROBIAL ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE 16S rRNA gene; KEGG orthologs; Makassar; Ordination; Pyrosequencing
ID GRADIENT GEL-ELECTROPHORESIS; MICROBIAL ABUNDANCE SPONGES; RELATING
   SPECIES TRAITS; RED-SEA; MARINE SPONGES; XESTOSPONGIA-TESTUDINARIA;
   ENVIRONMENTAL VARIABLES; RARE BIOSPHERE; STYLISSA-MASSA; SW SULAWESI
AB In this study, we used a 16S rRNA gene barcoded pyrosequencing approach to sample bacterial communities from six biotopes, namely, seawater, sediment and four sponge species (Stylissa carteri, Stylissa massa, Xestospongia testudinaria and Hyrtios erectus) inhabiting coral reefs of the Spermonde Archipelago, South Sulawesi, Indonesia. Samples were collected along a pronounced onshore to offshore environmental gradient. Our goals were to (1) compare higher taxon abundance among biotopes, (2) test to what extent variation in bacterial composition can be explained by the biotope versus environment, (3) identify dominant (> 300 sequences) bacterial operational taxonomic units (OTUs) and their closest known relatives and (4) assign putative functions to the sponge bacterial communities using a recently developed predictive metagenomic approach. We observed marked differences in bacterial composition and the relative abundance of the most abundant phyla, classes and orders among sponge species, seawater and sediment. Although all biotopes housed compositionally distinct bacterial communities, there were three prominent clusters. These included (1) both Stylissa species and seawater, (2) X. testudinaria and H. erectus and (3) sediment. Bacterial communities sampled from the same biotope, but different environments (based on proximity to the coast) were much more similar than bacterial communities from different biotopes in the same environment. The biotope thus appears to be a much more important structuring force than the surrounding environment. There were concomitant differences in the predicted counts of KEGG orthologs (KOs) suggesting that bacterial communities housed in different sponge species, sediment and seawater perform distinct functions. In particular, the bacterial communities of both Stylissa species were predicted to be enriched for KOs related to chemotaxis, nitrification and denitrification whereas bacterial communities in X. testudinaria and H. erectus were predicted to be enriched for KOs related to the toxin-antitoxin (TA) system, nutrient starvation and heavy metal export.
RI Cleary, Daniel/D-2582-2012; Moura Polonia, Ana Rita/K-7911-2014; Gomes,
   Newton/F-7430-2012; Gomes, Newton/K-3211-2015; CESAM, UA/M-3762-2015
OI Cleary, Daniel/0000-0002-6143-3390; Moura Polonia, Ana
   Rita/0000-0003-3381-7677; Gomes, Newton/0000-0003-1934-0091; Gomes,
   Newton/0000-0003-1934-0091; 
TC 25
Z9 26
SN 0095-3628
EI 1432-184X
PD NOV
PY 2015
VL 70
IS 4
BP 889
EP 903
DI 10.1007/s00248-015-0632-5
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology;
   Microbiology
UT WOS:000363952600004
PM 26072397
ER

PT J
AU Stepien, CC
AF Stepien, Courtney C.
TI Impacts of geography, taxonomy and functional group on inorganic carbon
   use patterns in marine macrophytes
SO JOURNAL OF ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE aquatic plant ecology; carbon concentration mechanism; Chlorophyta;
   latitude; macroecology; ocean carbonate cycle; Ochrophyta; pH drift
   assay; Rhodophyta; delta C-13
ID ALTERED COMPETITIVE INTERACTIONS; CO2 CONCENTRATING MECHANISMS; RED
   MACROALGAE RHODOPHYTA; OCEAN ACIDIFICATION; CORALLINE ALGAE;
   ACQUISITION; DIOXIDE; BICARBONATE; EVOLUTION; PHOTOSYNTHESIS
AB Carbon uptake in terrestrial plants functions under near-constant source carbon dioxide (CO2) concentrations and isotopic ratios, but aquatic macrophytes operate in a more complex system where environmental fluxes and biotic interactions undermine assumptions of constant CO2 concentration and C-13/C-12.
   Many marine macrophytes not only passively access CO2 for photosynthesis, but also actively concentrate CO2 and bicarbonate (HCO3-) using carbon concentration mechanisms (CCMs). These processes change macrophyte carbon fractionation signatures (C-13/C-12) and elevate seawater pH as high as 10.4 in mesocosm pH assays, in which the pH value reached is termed pH*.
   I assembled a global data set of 2027 marine macrophyte C-13 and pH assay values for 664 species to assess (i) how macrophyte C-13 varies with the abiotic parameters such as sea surface temperature (SST), latitude and habitat, and the organismal traits of taxonomic and functional group membership and (ii) how species C-13 is related to CCM presence or absence, as determined by a pH drift assay.
   Across 613 macrophyte species, collection site distance from the equator was negatively related to species C-13, while collection site variance in SST was positively related to species C-13. Macrophyte tissue C-13 differed among oceans as well as in intertidal versus subtidal habitats. Species from phylum Rhodophyta had the lowest C-13, and functional group was related to C-13, largely due to higher C-13 in calcifying species.
   Analysis of 141 species with paired pH*-C-13 data found that these metrics of CCM presence are not independent. As species C-13 increases so does the probability of species pH*>9.0, a threshold value of CCM presence in pH assays.
   Synthesis. CCMs revealed species patterns in communities at every scale investigated, from local emersion gradients to oceanic and global gradients. Trends in macrophyte C-13 values indicate that macrophytes rely more on CO2 further from the equator, but have increased use of HCO3- at sites with high temperature variance, patterns that may be driven by species turnover rather than intraspecific variation. Patterns in species CCMs will be crucial to understanding how macrophyte communities respond to ocean acidification-induced changes to SST and variability.
TC 12
Z9 12
SN 0022-0477
EI 1365-2745
PD NOV
PY 2015
VL 103
IS 6
BP 1372
EP 1383
DI 10.1111/1365-2745.12451
SC Plant Sciences; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000363339300002
ER

PT J
AU Saito, VS
   Soininen, J
   Fonseca-Gessner, AA
   Siqueira, T
AF Saito, Victor S.
   Soininen, Janne
   Fonseca-Gessner, Alaide A.
   Siqueira, Tadeu
TI Dispersal traits drive the phylogenetic distance decay of similarity in
   Neotropical stream metacommunities
SO JOURNAL OF BIOGEOGRAPHY
DT Article
DE aquatic insects; dispersal; distance decay; geographical distance;
   phylobetadiversity; Phylosor; south-eastern Brazil; voltinism
ID BETA DIVERSITY; FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; STOCHASTIC-PROCESSES; NICHE
   CONSERVATISM; AQUATIC INSECTS; ATLANTIC FOREST; SPECIES TRAITS; NEUTRAL
   THEORY; PATTERNS; COMMUNITIES
AB Aim The drivers of phylogenetic beta diversity include both local processes (e.g. environmental filtering) and regional processes (e.g. dispersal limitation). The role of environmental filtering can be investigated more directly by analysing community-environment associations, but dispersal limitation is one of the most challenging processes to examine. We investigated the role of traits related to dispersal - flight capacity, body size and voltinism - as drivers ofphylogenetic distance decay relationships in Neotropical stream insect communities.
   Location Headwater streams spread over 600km in south-eastern Brazil.
   Methods We compiled a data set of aquatic insect communities inhabiting streams across the State of SAo Paulo (Brazil). Then, we investigated environmental and spatial signals on phylobetadiversity patterns of aquatic insects using Mantel tests, multiple regressions on distance matrices and variation partitioning. We employed null models to investigate whether phylogenetic distance decay differed from pure compositional distance decay. We deconstructed the data set based on dispersal-related traits; we then ran distance decay analyses for these subsets separately.
   Results Geographical distance, rather than environmental distance, better explained the patterns of phylobetadiversity. We found that the phylogenetic decay relationship differed from the relationship expected for the null models only for univoltine, large-bodied genera with a high-flight capacity.
   Main conclusions Dispersal limitation, rather than species sorting, was the main driver for phylogenetic beta diversity in the metacommunity that we studied. We suggest that life-history strategies and mainly voltinism drive the distance decay of similarity in the insect communities examined. We additionally discuss the role of dispersal events over time to explain differences in distance decay patterns among tropical and other regions.
RI Soininen, Janne/A-4205-2008; Siqueira, Tadeu/A-6978-2009
OI Siqueira, Tadeu/0000-0001-5069-2904; Soininen,
   Janne/0000-0002-8583-3137; Saito, Victor/0000-0001-6112-7249
TC 17
Z9 17
SN 0305-0270
EI 1365-2699
PD NOV
PY 2015
VL 42
IS 11
BP 2101
EP 2111
DI 10.1111/jbi.12577
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Physical Geography
UT WOS:000362833700007
ER

PT J
AU Wong, MC
   Dowd, M
AF Wong, Melisa C.
   Dowd, Michael
TI Patterns in Taxonomic and Functional Diversity of Macrobenthic
   Invertebrates Across Seagrass Habitats: a Case Study in Atlantic Canada
SO ESTUARIES AND COASTS
DT Article
DE Biological traits analysis; Coastal marine ecosystems; Ecosystem
   functioning; Rao quadratic entropy index; Zostera marina
ID INFAUNAL MACROINVERTEBRATE ASSEMBLAGES; SECONDARY PRODUCTION; MARINE
   SEDIMENT; BIOLOGICAL TRAITS; COROPHIUM-INSIDIOSUM; ESTUARINE HABITATS;
   ORGANIC-MATTER; LIFE-HISTORY; PATCH SIZE; COMMUNITY
AB Functional diversity (FD) characterizes the role of species within communities based on their morphological, behavioural and life history traits. Taxonomic diversity is not always a surrogate for FD, and ecosystem functioning is more dependent on functional traits rather than species richness. Despite this, most diversity studies in seagrass ecosystems do not consider the functional trait landscape. Here, we compare and contrast the taxonomic and functional diversity and composition of macrobenthic invertebrates (infauna and small epifauna) across a gradient of seagrass habitats (bare sediment, bed edge and bed interior) at three sites in Nova Scotia, Canada. We also determine the relationship between taxonomic diversity and FD to gain insight into the consequences of species loss. At two sites, we found that taxonomic diversity (species number and Margalef and Simpson's indices) increased from bare sediments to the bed interior, while FD (Rao index) did not or else showed a weaker pattern. At a third site, both taxonomic and functional diversity tended to increase across the seagrass gradient. Despite the differences in relationships between taxonomic and functional diversity, functional trait composition tended to be distinct across seagrass habitats at all sites. Regressions showed that FD increased either hyperbolically or linearly with taxonomic diversity. Our study suggests that for seagrass ecosystems similar to the ones sampled, the implications of species loss for ecosystem functioning may not be easily predicted from data of taxonomic diversity alone. This study provides some of the first data of taxonomic and functional diversity in seagrass ecosystems, which can be used to inform conservation objectives and management practices.
TC 16
Z9 19
SN 1559-2723
EI 1559-2731
PD NOV
PY 2015
VL 38
IS 6
BP 2323
EP 2336
DI 10.1007/s12237-015-9967-x
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000362580300036
ER

PT J
AU Macheriotou, L
   Braeckman, BP
   Rigaux, A
   De Meester, N
   Moens, T
   Derycke, S
AF Macheriotou, Lara
   Braeckman, Bart P.
   Rigaux, Annelien
   De Meester, Nele
   Moens, Tom
   Derycke, Sofie
TI Intraspecific functional trait variability does not result in higher
   fitness under thermal stress in a free-living marine nematode
SO JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL MARINE BIOLOGY AND ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE Litoditis marina; Environmental change; Acclimation; Population
   dynamics; Outbreeding depression
ID CLIMATE-CHANGE; ENVIRONMENTAL-CHANGE; PELLIODITIS-MARINA; INTERSPECIFIC
   VARIABILITY; OUTBREEDING DEPRESSION; INBREEDING DEPRESSION; EVOLUTIONARY
   RESCUE; GENETIC DIVERSITY; MOVING OPTIMUM; EXTINCTION
AB Climate change has an impact on all levels of biodiversity: genes, species, populations and ecosystems. This effect is expected to be dependent on the rate of change. When faced with unfavorable environmental conditions, individuals have three non-exclusive options by which they can mitigate these changes: temporal alterations in phenology, spatial tracking of optimal conditions or in situ adaptation. For the latter to occur requires the existence of variability among conspecifics with respect to traits that directly or indirectly influence individual performance and fitness. One such "functional" trait is thermal stress tolerance. We investigated the presence of intraspecific functional trait variability of isofemale lineages of the free-living marine nematode Litoditis marina in monoculture, double and quadruple mixtures under thermal stress, which was applied in a gradient and a sudden treatment over 20 days, corresponding to at least four generations. We found a high degree of intraspecific functional trait variability relevant to thermal tolerance. This type of variability has traditionally been considered negligible compared to interspecific variation, but our results demonstrate the importance of its inclusion within trait-based eco-evolutionary studies as this will confer increased accuracy when inputting physiological parameters to relevant models (e.g. species distribution models). Additionally, we found a significant effect of the temperature treatments. In accordance with the majority of experimental evidence, our populations showed a stronger response to a sudden versus a gradient increase in temperature. Contrary to our expectations, no significant differences were observed between monocultures, double and quadruple lineage mixtures suggesting that increased intraspecific trait variability did not lead to higher fitness in L. marina populations exposed to thermal stress. (C) 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
RI Macheriotou, Lara/V-1366-2017
OI Macheriotou, Lara/0000-0002-5662-5689
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 0022-0981
EI 1879-1697
PD NOV
PY 2015
VL 472
BP 14
EP 23
DI 10.1016/j.jembe.2015.06.016
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000360875000002
ER

PT J
AU Jiang, ZG
   Brosse, S
   Jiang, XM
   Zhang, E
AF Jiang, Zhong-Guan
   Brosse, Sebastien
   Jiang, Xiao-Ming
   Zhang, E.
TI Measuring ecosystem degradation through half a century of fish species
   introductions and extirpations in a large isolated lake
SO ECOLOGICAL INDICATORS
DT Article
DE Exotic species; Richness; Functional diversity; Isolated lake;
   Freshwater fish; Endemism
ID ASSESS ANTHROPOGENIC IMPACTS; TAXONOMIC DISTINCTNESS; FUNCTIONAL
   DIVERSITY; COMMUNITY ECOLOGY; BIODIVERSITY; WATER; CONSERVATION;
   QUALITY; RICHNESS; INDEXES
AB The introduction of exotic species and the extirpation of native species that occurred during the past two centuries have strongly modified the structure of most plant and animal assemblages across the globe. Such a biotic change is particularly marked in isolated environments such as islands or isolated lakes. Most studies reported drastic changes between before and after human disturbances, but the dynamics of change in assemblage structure through the invasion and extirpation processes are rarely reported. Here we measured the aquatic ecosystem degradation through exotic species introduction and native species extirpation experienced by Lake Erhai (China) during the last 50 years using structural, functional and taxonomic distinctness biodiversity indices. Structural diversity (species richness) did not varied monotonically along the temporal gradient, due to an opposite trend between exotic species increase and a concomitant decline of native species richness. Functional diversity displayed unclear ascending trends driven by the introduction of exotic species having distinct functional traits than natives. Taxonomic distinctness indices exhibited an increase of the average taxonomic distinctness (Delta(+)), but a decrease of the variation in taxonomic distinctness (Lambda(+)) through time. Structural, functional and distinctness indices providing complementary information on ecosystem degradation, we here proposed a new multifaceted degradation index integrating these three facets of biodiversity. Such an index provided an accurate representation of the faunistic changes experienced by Lake Erhai and might constitute a comprehensive way to measure ecosystem degradation through exotic fish species introductions and native fish species extirpations. (C) 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
TC 3
Z9 5
SN 1470-160X
EI 1872-7034
PD NOV
PY 2015
VL 58
BP 104
EP 112
DI 10.1016/j.ecolind.2015.05.040
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000360776100012
ER

PT J
AU Schalk, CM
   Montana, CG
   Springer, L
AF Schalk, Christopher M.
   Montana, Carmen G.
   Springer, Laura
TI Morphological diversity and community organization of desert anurans
SO JOURNAL OF ARID ENVIRONMENTS
DT Article
DE Amphibian; Assembly rules; Community structure; Ecomorphology;
   Environmental filtering; Null model
ID COMPETITIVE-EXCLUSION; CLIMATE-CHANGE; ECOMORPHOLOGICAL DIVERSIFICATION;
   FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; PRINCIPAL COMPONENTS; LIMITING SIMILARITY; FISH
   ASSEMBLAGES; AMPHIBIAN LARVAE; ECOLOGY; FROGS
AB Morphological approaches have been used extensively to understand assembly rules (species interactions, environmental filtering, and neutral processes) that structure ecological communities. Desert anurans cope with limited water by either being restricted to permanent water or becoming more fossorial, which should be reflected in their morphology. We examined morphological diversity of 16 frog species across six habitat types within the Chihuahuan Desert to investigate the relationship between species richness and morphological space. We measured 13 morphological traits associated with locomotion, habitat use, and feeding. Principal components analysis separated species into three ecomorphological groups: fossorial, terrestrial, and semi-aquatic species. Morphological diversity was analyzed and compared against a null model and revealed nonrandom community structure. The total assemblage morphospace increased in relation to species richness, though this relationship was not significant. Species were significantly packed within the morphospace exhibiting high morphological similarity while being less evenly dispersed, with increasing species richness, indicative of a response to an environmental gradient. Given the highly xeric nature of the Chihuahuan Desert, our results support the assumption that environmental filtering, rather than interspecific interactions, shapes assemblages' structure by favoring species with similar traits to co-occur more often within a given habitat type than expected by chance. (C) 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
TC 8
Z9 9
SN 0140-1963
EI 1095-922X
PD NOV
PY 2015
VL 122
BP 132
EP 140
DI 10.1016/j.jaridenv.2015.06.019
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000359170000015
ER

PT J
AU Sussarellu, R
   Huvet, A
   Lapegue, S
   Quillen, V
   Lelong, C
   Cornette, F
   Jensen, LF
   Bierne, N
   Boudry, P
AF Sussarellu, Rossana
   Huvet, Arnaud
   Lapegue, Sylvie
   Quillen, Virgile
   Lelong, Christophe
   Cornette, Florence
   Jensen, Lasse Fast
   Bierne, Nicolas
   Boudry, Pierre
TI Additive transcriptomic variation associated with reproductive traits
   suggest local adaptation in a recently settled population of the Pacific
   oyster, Crassostrea gigas
SO BMC GENOMICS
DT Article
DE Crassostrea gigas; Adaptation; Invasiveness; Fertility; Sex-ratio;
   Transcriptome; Microarray
ID LIFE-HISTORY EVOLUTION; GENE-EXPRESSION; FUNCTIONAL GENOMICS; INVASION
   GENETICS; SEX DETERMINATION; WADDEN SEA; IDENTIFICATION; GROWTH;
   THUNBERG; STRESS
AB Background: Originating from Northeast Asia, the Pacific oyster Crassostrea gigas has been introduced into a large number of countries for aquaculture purpose. Following introduction, the Pacific oyster has turned into an invasive species in an increasing number of coastal areas, notably recently in Northern Europe.
   Methods: To explore potential adaptation of reproductive traits in populations with different histories, we set up a common garden experiment based on the comparison of progenies from two populations of Pacific oyster sampled in France and Denmark and their hybrids. Sex ratio, condition index and microarray gene expression in gonads, were analyzed in each progeny (n = 60).
   Results: A female-biased sex-ratio and a higher condition index were observed in the Danish progeny, possibly reflecting an evolutionary reproductive strategy to increase the potential success of natural recruitment in recently settled population. Using multifarious statistical approaches and accounting for sex differences we identified several transcripts differentially expressed between the Danish and French progenies, for which additive genetic basis is suspected (showing intermediate expression levels in hybrids, and therefore additivity). Candidate transcripts included mRNA coding for sperm quality and insulin metabolism, known to be implicated in coordinated control and success of reproduction.
   Conclusions: Observed differences suggest that adaptation of invasive populations might have occurred during expansion acting on reproductive traits, and in particular on a female-biased sex-ratio, gamete quality and fertility.
RI Lapegue, Sylvie/H-5042-2011
OI Boudry, Pierre/0000-0002-5150-2276; Huvet, Arnaud/0000-0001-6912-881X
TC 9
Z9 9
SN 1471-2164
PD OCT 19
PY 2015
VL 16
AR 808
DI 10.1186/s12864-015-1972-8
SC Biotechnology & Applied Microbiology; Genetics & Heredity
UT WOS:000363101300001
PM 26483072
ER

PT J
AU Guesnet, V
   Lassalle, G
   Chaalali, A
   Kearney, K
   Saint-Beat, B
   Karimi, B
   Grami, B
   Tecchio, S
   Niquil, N
   Lobry, J
AF Guesnet, Vanessa
   Lassalle, Geraldine
   Chaalali, Aurelie
   Kearney, Kelly
   Saint-Beat, Blanche
   Karimi, Battle
   Grami, Boutheina
   Tecchio, Samuele
   Niquil, Nathalie
   Lobry, Jeremy
TI Incorporating food-web parameter uncertainty into Ecopath-derived
   ecological network indicators
SO ECOLOGICAL MODELLING
DT Article
DE Ecopath with Ecosim; Ecosystem models; Network analysis; Parameter
   uncertainty; Comparative studies
ID MARINE ECOSYSTEMS; TROPHIC NETWORKS; MODELS; STABILITY; FISHERIES;
   MATURITY; STRATEGY; PACKAGE; IMPACT; ECOSIM
AB Ecological network analysis (ENA) provides numerous ecosystem level indices offering a valuable approach to compare and categorize the ecological structure and function of ecosystems. The inclusion of ENA methods in Ecopath with Ecosim (EwE) has insured their continued contribution to ecosystem-based management. In EwE, ENA-derived ecological conclusions are currently based on single values of ENA indices calculated from a unique input flow matrix. Here, we document an easy-to-use routine that allows EwE users to incorporate uncertainty in EwE input data into the calculation of ENA indices. This routine, named ENAtool, is a suite of Matlab functions that performs three main steps: (1) import of an existing Ecopath model and its associated parameter uncertainty values in the form of uncertainty intervals into Matlab; (2) generation of an ensemble of Ecopath models with the same structure as the original, and with parameter values varying based on the prescribed uncertainty limits; and (3) calculation of a set of 13 ENA indices for each ensemble member (one set of flow values) and of summary statistics across the whole ensemble. This novel routine offers the opportunity to calculate ENA indices ranges and confidence intervals, and thus to perform quantitative data analyses. An application of ENAtool on a pre-existing Ecopath model of the Bay of Biscay continental shelf is presented, with a focus on the robustness of previously published ENA-based ecological traits of this ecosystem when the newly introduced uncertainty values are added. We also describe the sensitivity of the ENAtool results to both the number of ensemble members used and to the uncertainty interval set around each input parameter. Ecological conclusions derived from EwE, particularly those regarding the comparison of structural and functional elements for a range of ecosystem types or the assessment of ecosystem properties along gradients of environmental conditions or anthropogenic disturbances, will gain in statistical interpretability. (C) 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
RI Karimi, Battle/Q-2877-2018; Lassalle, Geraldine/H-7150-2014; Kearney,
   Kelly/A-8673-2014
OI Karimi, Battle/0000-0002-4523-974X; Lassalle,
   Geraldine/0000-0002-8548-7254; Kearney, Kelly/0000-0002-6152-5236;
   Niquil, Nathalie/0000-0002-0772-754X
TC 9
Z9 10
SN 0304-3800
EI 1872-7026
PD OCT 10
PY 2015
VL 313
BP 29
EP 40
DI 10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2015.05.036
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000361865000003
ER

PT J
AU Barnes, RSK
   Hendy, IW
AF Barnes, R. S. K.
   Hendy, I. W.
TI Seagrass-associated macrobenthic functional diversity and functional
   structure along an estuarine gradient
SO ESTUARINE COASTAL AND SHELF SCIENCE
DT Article
DE Biodiversity; Biological traits; Estuarine gradients; Functional
   diversity; Knysna; Macrobenthos; Seagrass
ID INTERTIDAL SEAGRASS; KNYSNA ESTUARY; DISTRIBUTION PATTERNS; ECOSYSTEM
   PROCESSES; EUROPEAN ESTUARIES; SPATIAL VARIATION; COMMUNITY CHANGES;
   SPECIES RICHNESS; ZOSTERA-NOLTII; NORTHERN JAPAN
AB Changes in the relative importance of the 27 component functional groups (FGs) of seagrass-associated macrobenthos were assessed up the long axis of an estuarine system. Although previously observed division of the estuary into two sections with respect to species diversity was confirmed, this did not correspond to any functional compartmentalisation. Functionally, division was into the terminal extremes and the large intervening marine/lagoonal/lower-estuarine zone, within which no linear segregation of sites occurred. 40% of individual FGs in the latter showed no variation at all, and variation in the remainder was only axially related in two cases, one positive and one negative. Overall structure of the dominant FGs at each locality remained uniform, although rank orders of proportional importance varied widely. Only one major marine/lagoonal FG failed to penetrate the upper estuary at the time of sampling. Estuarine components may change spatially, sometimes dramatically, but overall functional pattern shows considerably less change than the species numbers usually used in characterisation. (c) 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
OI Barnes, Richard/0000-0002-5773-5994
TC 7
Z9 8
SN 0272-7714
EI 1096-0015
PD OCT 5
PY 2015
VL 164
BP 233
EP 243
DI 10.1016/j.ecss.2015.07.050
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000367862400025
ER

PT J
AU Aarnio, K
   Tornroos, A
   Bjorklund, C
   Bonsdorff, E
AF Aarnio, Katri
   Tornroos, Anna
   Bjorklund, Charlotta
   Bonsdorff, Erik
TI Food web positioning of a recent coloniser: the North American Harris
   mud crab Rhithropanopeus harrisii (Gould, 1841) in the northern Baltic
   Sea
SO AQUATIC INVASIONS
DT Article
DE introduced species; feeding; habitat choice; stable isotopes; biological
   traits; experiment
ID LOW-DIVERSITY SYSTEM; BIOLOGICAL INVASIONS; FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY;
   ECOSYSTEM PROCESSES; ERIOCHEIR-SINENSIS; SEASONAL-VARIATION; BLUE CRABS;
   MARINE; ECOLOGY; BIODIVERSITY
AB Identifying resource use and functional traits of non-indigenous species are promising means to increase the ability to predict ecological consequences of invasions. One of the most widely spread brachyuran crab species, and a recent invader in the northern Baltic Sea, is the North American Harris mud crab, Rhithropanopeus harrisii (Gould, 1841). Although spread, establishment, and population structure have been studied for this species, little is known about its role and impact in a new environment. We investigated the position and role of R. harrisii in the coastal food web by combining spatial and temporal estimates of trophic position using stable isotopes (delta C-13 and delta N-15), with short-term food-and habitat-choice experiments. We observed a stable pattern in the trophic position between two environmentally different locations in the Archipelago Sea over the production season. The identification of a natural breakpoint in carbon stable isotopes at the size of 12 mm carapace width suggested a presence of an ontogenetic diet shift, which was confirmed by isotope signatures positioning large R. harrisii among secondary consumers and small individuals with primary consumers. The generalist consumer nature of R. harrisii and preference for structured habitat was supported by an active habitat and food choice, revealing no preference for prey species (polychaetes versus amphipod), but selection of brown algae over bare mud. To broaden the understanding of the functional role of R. harrisii, we combined our findings with other known biological and ecological traits of the species and qualitatively compared these to characteristics of other benthic organisms in the northern Baltic Sea, suggesting a general similarity in traits.
OI Tornroos, Anna/0000-0002-5790-2449
TC 8
Z9 8
SN 1798-6540
EI 1818-5487
PD OCT
PY 2015
VL 10
IS 4
BP 399
EP 413
DI 10.3391/ai.2015.10.4.04
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000368533800004
ER

PT J
AU Baastrup-Spohr, L
   Iversen, LL
   Borum, J
   Sand-Jensen, K
AF Baastrup-Spohr, Lars
   Iversen, Lars Lonsmann
   Borum, Jens
   Sand-Jensen, Kaj
TI Niche specialization and functional traits regulate the rarity of
   charophytes in the Nordic countries
SO AQUATIC CONSERVATION-MARINE AND FRESHWATER ECOSYSTEMS
DT Article
DE lake; brackish; Red List; rare species; algae; vegetation; nutrient
   enrichment; charophyte; niche specialization; functional traits
ID CHARA-ASPERA; ECOLOGICAL SPECIALIZATION; LAKE; VEGETATION; ABUNDANCE;
   SALINITY; DECLINE; PLANTS; LIGHT; SCALE
AB 1. Charophytes are benthic macroalgae that live in fresh and brackish waters. Given the historic deterioration of their habitats and their competitive inferiority relative to tall rooted plants under eutrophic conditions, it is hypothesized that charophytes are among the most threatened autotrophs. Also, it is expected that charophytes with generalist niches and functional traits, such as tolerance of a broad salinity range and large height, should thrive owing to available habitats and stronger competitive ability.
   2. These hypotheses were tested comparing the rarity of charophytes in the Nordic countries with other autotrophs and analysing the relationship to species niche specialization and functional traits. A value on a rarity-commonness scale was assigned to each species based on their Red List status. Niche specialization was evaluated by the Outlying Mean Index using a large Danish dataset while traits were derived from the literature.
   3. Supporting the hypotheses, 50-87% of charophyte species were Red Listed, which is much greater than for vascular aquatic (30-35%) and terrestrial plants (18-28%). Commonness of charophytes decreased significantly with niche specialization in separate analyses of brackish and freshwater sites. For brackish water species, the most influential parameter determining species distribution was salinity while for freshwater species, alkalinity, lake size and chlorophyll concentration played a major role. Four functional traits: shoot height, salinity tolerance, bulbil production and flexible life cycle duration were significantly positively related to commonness.
   4. In conclusion, charophytes contain a larger fraction of threatened species compared with other groups of autotrophs. The few common charophytes are generalists tolerant of a wide range of conditions, while specialists often have short stature, restricted life cycle variability and are rare in the disturbed contemporary landscape. It is thus a conservation priority to delineate accurately the environmental conditions preferred by the threatened species and protect or restore proper habitats. Copyright (C) 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
RI Baastrup-Spohr, Lars/K-4696-2014
OI Baastrup-Spohr, Lars/0000-0001-8382-984X; Borum,
   Jens/0000-0002-4861-6563; Sand-Jensen, Kaj/0000-0003-2534-4638
TC 7
Z9 11
SN 1052-7613
EI 1099-0755
PD OCT
PY 2015
VL 25
IS 5
BP 609
EP 621
DI 10.1002/aqc.2544
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology; Water
   Resources
UT WOS:000365401900003
ER

PT J
AU Dineen, AA
   Fraiser, ML
   Tong, JN
AF Dineen, Ashley A.
   Fraiser, Margaret L.
   Tong, Jinnan
TI Low functional evenness in a post-extinction Anisian (Middle Triassic)
   paleocommunity: A case study of the Leidapo Member (Qingyan Formation),
   south China
SO GLOBAL AND PLANETARY CHANGE
DT Article
DE Permo-Triassic; Paleoecology; Functional diversity; South China; Middle
   Triassic; Qingyan Formation
ID PHANEROZOIC BIODIVERSITY CRISES; PERMIAN MASS EXTINCTION; GUIZHOU
   PROVINCE; SOUTHWESTERN CHINA; ECOSYSTEM FUNCTION; ECOLOGICAL
   COMMUNITIES; MARINE ECOSYSTEMS; CURRENT KNOWLEDGE; SPECIES RICHNESS;
   FISH COMMUNITIES
AB Functional diversity, defined as the abundance and distribution of traits present in a community, has important implications for the functioning of ecosystems in the wake of events of major disturbance. Here, we examine the functional diversity of a Middle Triassic paleocommunity in the wake of the largest mass extinction in Earth's history, the Permo-Triassic mass extinction (PTME). Field data was collected and analyzed for a highly diverse invertebrate marine fossil assemblage, the Middle Triassic (Anisian) Leidapo Member (Qingyan Formation) of Qingyan, south China. Previously interpreted to represent a fully restructured paleocommunity in the aftermath of the PTME, our results indicate that the fauna of Leidapo Member had high taxonomic diversity and high functional richness, however was functionally uneven. Despite the presence of 24 different functional groups, the paleocommunity was numerically and ecologically dominated by one functional group consisting of mostly attached epifaunal suspension feeding brachiopods. The overwhelming dominance of this Anisian paleocommunity by one functional group implies that either, 1) resource availability in the community was uneven, and/or 2) strong environmental or niche filtering was in effect. As such, while the Anisian Leidapo Member paleocommunity was deposited in a fairly stable shallow water paleoenvironment, this biotic assemblage would have been very vulnerable to biotic and environmental perturbations. While it is uncertain whether or not this pattern is typical of paleocommunities in the aftermath of the PTME, these results imply that some Anisian paleocommunities may not have been as fully restructured as previously thought, and may have been inherently unstable due to the numerous biotic and environmental changes present in the Triassic. (C) 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
TC 6
Z9 6
SN 0921-8181
EI 1872-6364
PD OCT
PY 2015
VL 133
BP 79
EP 86
DI 10.1016/j.gloplacha.2015.08.001
SC Physical Geography; Geology
UT WOS:000365053700008
ER

PT J
AU Suggett, DJ
   Goyen, S
   Evenhuis, C
   Szabo, M
   Pettay, DT
   Warner, ME
   Ralph, PJ
AF Suggett, David J.
   Goyen, Samantha
   Evenhuis, Chris
   Szabo, Milan
   Pettay, D. Tye
   Warner, Mark E.
   Ralph, Peter J.
TI Functional diversity of photobiological traits within the genus
   Symbiodinium appears to be governed by the interaction of cell size with
   cladal designation
SO NEW PHYTOLOGIST
DT Article
DE cell size; fast repetition rate fluorescence; genotype; light
   absorption; nonphotochemical quenching; photosynthesis; photosystem II
   (PSII); Symbiodinium
ID FAST REPETITION RATE; CHLOROPHYLL-A FLUORESCENCE; FREE-LIVING
   SYMBIODINIUM; PHOTOSYNTHETIC ELECTRON-TRANSPORT; CORAL
   POCILLOPORA-DAMICORNIS; REEF CORALS; SCLERACTINIAN CORALS;
   MARINE-PHYTOPLANKTON; OCEAN ACIDIFICATION; PLASTOQUINONE POOL
AB Dinoflagellates of the genus Symbiodinium express broad diversity in both genetic identity (phylogeny) and photosynthetic function to presumably optimize ecological success across extreme light environments; however, whether differences in the primary photobiological characteristics that govern photosynthetic optimization are ultimately a function of phylogeny is entirely unresolved.
   We applied a novel fast repetition rate fluorometry approach to screen genetically distinct Symbiodinium types (n = 18) spanning five clades (A-D, F) for potential phylogenetic trends in factors modulating light absorption (effective cross-section, reaction center content) and utilization (photochemical vs dynamic nonphotochemical quenching; [1 - C] vs [1 - Q]) by photosystem II (PSII).
   The variability of PSII light absorption was independent of phylogenetic designation, but closely correlated with cell size across types, whereas PSII light utilization intriguingly followed one of three characteristic patterns: (1) similar reliance on [1 - C] and [1 - Q] or (2) preferential reliance on [1 - C] (mostly A, B types) vs (3) preferential reliance on [1 - Q] (mostly C, D, F types), and thus generally consistent with cladal designation.
   Our functional trait-based approach shows, for the first time, how Symbiodinium photosynthetic function is governed by the interplay between phylogenetically dependent and independent traits, and is potentially a means to reconcile complex biogeographic patterns of Symbiodinium phylogenetic diversity in nature.
RI Suggett, David/G-9212-2017; Ralph, Peter/C-5029-2009; Szabo,
   Milan/L-9942-2014
OI Suggett, David/0000-0001-5326-2520; Ralph, Peter/0000-0002-3103-7346;
   Szabo, Milan/0000-0001-6235-2894; Evenhuis,
   Christian/0000-0001-9903-7716
TC 28
Z9 28
SN 0028-646X
EI 1469-8137
PD OCT
PY 2015
VL 208
IS 2
BP 370
EP 381
DI 10.1111/nph.13483
SC Plant Sciences
UT WOS:000364654200010
PM 26017701
ER

PT J
AU Giam, X
   Hadiaty, RK
   Tan, HH
   Parenti, LR
   Wowor, D
   Sauri, S
   Chong, KY
   Yeo, DCJ
   Wilcove, DS
AF Giam, Xingli
   Hadiaty, Renny K.
   Tan, Heok Hui
   Parenti, Lynne R.
   Wowor, Daisy
   Sauri, Sopian
   Chong, Kwek Yan
   Yeo, Darren C. J.
   Wilcove, David S.
TI Mitigating the impact of oil-palm monoculture on freshwater fishes in
   Southeast Asia
SO CONSERVATION BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE agriculture; buffers; fishes; functional diversity; land sharing;
   riparian reserves; stream; structural equation model
ID FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; BIODIVERSITY CONSERVATION; RIPARIAN RESERVES;
   MULTIPLE TRAITS; FOREST STREAMS; PLANTATIONS; ECOLOGY; ASSEMBLAGES;
   FRAMEWORK; MALAYSIA
AB Anthropogenic land-cover change is driving biodiversity loss worldwide. At the epicenter of this crisis lies Southeast Asia, where biodiversity-rich forests are being converted to oil-palm monocultures. As demand for palm oil increases, there is an urgent need to find strategies that maintain biodiversity in plantations. Previous studies found that retaining forest patches within plantations benefited some terrestrial taxa but not others. However, no study has focused on aquatic taxa such as fishes, despite their importance to human well-being. We assessed the efficacy of forested riparian reserves in conserving freshwater fish biodiversity in oil-palm monoculture by sampling stream fish communities in an oil-palm plantation in Central Kalimantan, Indonesia. Forested riparian reserves maintained preconversion local fish species richness and functional diversity. In contrast, local and total species richness, biomass, and functional diversity declined markedly in streams without riparian reserves. Mechanistically, riparian reserves appeared to increase local species richness by increasing leaf litter cover and maintaining coarse substrate. The loss of fishes specializing in leaf litter and coarse substrate decreased functional diversity and altered community composition in oil-palm plantation streams that lacked riparian reserves. Thus, a land-sharing strategy that incorporates the retention of forested riparian reserves may maintain the ecological integrity of fish communities in oil-palm plantations. We urge policymakers and growers to make retention of riparian reserves in oil-palm plantations standard practice, and we encourage palm-oil purchasers to source only palm oil from plantations that employ this practice.
RI Yeo, Darren/H-9790-2012; Kwek Yan, Chong/K-8375-2016
OI Kwek Yan, Chong/0000-0003-4754-8957; Giam, Xingli/0000-0002-5239-9477
TC 22
Z9 22
SN 0888-8892
EI 1523-1739
PD OCT
PY 2015
VL 29
IS 5
BP 1357
EP 1367
DI 10.1111/cobi.12483
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000363729100011
PM 25800305
ER

PT J
AU Gao, M
   Wang, XX
   Hui, C
   Yi, HP
   Zhang, CQ
   Wu, XQ
   Bi, XL
   Wang, Y
   Xiao, LX
   Wang, D
AF Gao, Meng
   Wang, Xinxiu
   Hui, Cang
   Yi, Huapeng
   Zhang, Chuanqi
   Wu, Xiaoqing
   Bi, Xiaoli
   Wang, Yong
   Xiao, Luxiang
   Wang, De
TI Assembly of plant communities in coastal wetlands-the role of saltcedar
   Tamarix chinensis during early succession
SO JOURNAL OF PLANT ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE supratidal wetland; functional traits; spatial structure; trait
   convergence; facilitative effect; wind sheltering
ID SPECIES COOCCURRENCE PATTERNS; LIMITING SIMILARITY; FUNCTIONAL TRAITS;
   NICHE LIMITATION; TREE INVASIONS; FOREST; RULES; FACILITATION;
   CONVERGENCE; COMPETITION
AB Aims
   The mechanisms of plant community assembly are hypothesized to vary at different stages of succession. Here, we explore the local assemblage structure of a herbaceous plant community at its early stage of succession in a supratidal wetland. Specifically, we assess the role of Chinese saltcedar (Tamarix chinensis), the lone dominant shrub species, in shaping the spatial structure and species composition in the local plant community, after landscape alteration.
   Methods
   We used the multivariate trend-surface analysis for analyzing the spatial structure of the community composition. A null model was also used to detect potential biotic interactions between species. Statistical significance was derived from a permutation test by randomizing the presence-absence matrix and functional traits independently. Sensitivity analysis by randomly selecting 50 subplots and repeating the null model tests was also done. Finally, rank correlation analysis was used to study the relationship between effect sizes and distance to nearest T. chinensis individuals.
   Important Findings
   The herbaceous plant community was highly structured and shaped by the presence of T. chinensis. At local scale, two functional traits, plant height and leaf area, were found to be significantly convergent. Dispersal, environmental stress and interspecific competition played a trivial effect on the local community assembly. The facilitating effect of T. chinensis on the pioneering herbaceous plants, through acting as a wind shelter, was put forward as the dominant community assembly process.
RI Hui, Cang/A-1781-2008
OI Hui, Cang/0000-0002-3660-8160
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 1752-9921
EI 1752-993X
PD OCT
PY 2015
VL 8
IS 5
BP 539
EP 548
DI 10.1093/jpe/rtu037
SC Plant Sciences; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000363250800009
ER

PT J
AU Montalto, V
   Rinaldi, A
   Sara, G
AF Montalto, V.
   Rinaldi, A.
   Sara, G.
TI Life history traits to predict biogeographic species distributions in
   bivalves
SO SCIENCE OF NATURE
DT Article
DE Functional trait-based model; Bivalve; Temperature; Food; Sub-tidal
   system; Mediterranean
ID CLIMATE-CHANGE; BODY-SIZE; FUNCTIONAL TRAITS; MYTILUS-GALLOPROVINCIALIS;
   DISTRIBUTION MODELS; INTERTIDAL MUSSELS; CRASSOSTREA-GIGAS; ECOLOGICAL
   NICHE; METABOLIC THEORY; NORTH-AMERICA
AB Organismal fecundity (F) and its relationship with body size (BS) are key factors in predicting species distribution under current and future scenarios of global change. A functional trait-based dynamic energy budget (FT-DEB) is proposed as a mechanistic approach to predict the variation of F and BS as function of environmental correlates using two marine bivalves as model species (Mytilus galloprovincialis and Brachidontes pharaonis). Validation proof of model skill (i.e., degree of correspondence between model predictions and field observations) and stationarity (i.e., ability of a model generated from data collected at one place/time to predict processes at another place/time) was provided to test model performance in predicting the bivalve distribution throughout the 22 sites in the Central Mediterranean Sea under local conditions of food density and body temperature. Model skill and stationarity were tested through the estimate of commission (i.e., proportion of species' absences predicted present) and omission (i.e., proportion of presences predicted absent) errors of predictions by comparing mechanistic predicted vs. observed F and BS values throughout the study area extrapolated by lab experiments and literature search. The resulting relationship was reliable for both species, and body size and fecundity were highly correlated in M. galloprovincialis compared to B. pharaonis; FT-DEB showed correct predictions of presence in more than 75 % of sites, and the regression between BS predicted vs. observed was highly significant in both species. Whilst recognising the importance of biotic interactions in shaping the distribution of species, our FT-DEB approach provided reliable quantitative estimates of where our species had sufficient F to support local populations or suggesting reproductive failure. Mechanistically, estimating F and BS as key traits of species life history can also be addressed within a broader, scale-dependent context that surpasses the limitations related to correlative species distribution models.
OI SARA', Gianluca/0000-0002-7658-5274
TC 6
Z9 6
SN 0028-1042
EI 1432-1904
PD OCT
PY 2015
VL 102
IS 9-10
AR 61
DI 10.1007/s00114-015-1313-4
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000363046800016
PM 26373559
ER

PT J
AU Brown, MB
   Schlacher, TA
   Schoeman, DS
   Weston, MA
   Huijbers, CM
   Olds, AD
   Connolly, RM
AF Brown, Marion B.
   Schlacher, Thomas A.
   Schoeman, David S.
   Weston, Michael A.
   Huijbers, Chantal M.
   Olds, Andrew D.
   Connolly, Rod M.
TI Invasive carnivores alter ecological function and enhance
   complementarity in scavenger assemblages on ocean beaches
SO ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE birds of prey; food webs; foxes; functional traits; invasive species;
   raptors; sandy beaches; scavengers
ID TERRESTRIAL ECOSYSTEMS; SANDY BEACHES; FOOD WEBS; RED FOX; MARINE;
   IMPACTS; CARRION; RESOURCES; SUBSIDIES; SEA
AB Species composition is expected to alter ecological function in assemblages if species traits differ strongly. Such effects are often large and persistent for nonnative carnivores invading islands. Alternatively, high similarity in traits within assemblages creates a degree of functional redundancy in ecosystems. Here we tested whether species turnover results in functional ecological equivalence or complementarity, and whether invasive carnivores on islands significantly alter such ecological function. The model system consisted of vertebrate scavengers (dominated by raptors) foraging on animal carcasses on ocean beaches on two Australian islands, one with and one without invasive red foxes (Vulpes vulpes). Partitioning of scavenging events among species, carcass removal rates, and detection speeds were quantified using camera traps baited with fish carcasses at the dune-beach interface. Complete segregation of temporal foraging niches between mammals (nocturnal) and birds (diurnal) reflects complementarity in carrion utilization. Conversely, functional redundancy exists within the bird guild where several species of raptors dominate carrion removal in a broadly similar way. As predicted, effects of red foxes were large. They substantially changed the nature and rate of the scavenging process in the system: (1) foxes consumed over half (55%) of all carrion available at night, compared with negligible mammalian foraging at night on the fox-free island, and (2) significant shifts in the composition of the scavenger assemblages consuming beach-cast carrion are the consequence of fox invasion at one island. Arguably, in the absence of other mammalian apex predators, the addition of red foxes creates a new dimension of functional complementarity in beach food webs. However, this functional complementarity added by foxes is neither benign nor neutral, as marine carrion subsidies to coastal red fox populations are likely to facilitate their persistence as exotic carnivores.
RI Schlacher, Thomas/J-4614-2016; Huijbers, Chantal/J-5176-2014
OI Schlacher, Thomas/0000-0003-2184-9217; Huijbers,
   Chantal/0000-0001-5206-3415; Olds, Andrew/0000-0002-8027-3599; Connolly,
   Rod/0000-0001-6223-1291; Schoeman, David/0000-0003-1258-0885
TC 19
Z9 19
SN 0012-9658
EI 1939-9170
PD OCT
PY 2015
VL 96
IS 10
BP 2715
EP 2725
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000362853600015
PM 26649392
ER

PT J
AU Rigolet, C
   Thiebaut, E
   Brind'Amour, A
   Dubois, SF
AF Rigolet, Carinne
   Thiebaut, Eric
   Brind'Amour, Anik
   Dubois, Stanislas F.
TI Investigating isotopic functional indices to reveal changes in the
   structure and functioning of benthic communities
SO FUNCTIONAL ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE community-wide metrics; functional diversity; habitats; stable isotopes;
   trophic niche width
ID AMPHIPOD HAPLOOPS-NIRAE; DIVERSITY MEASURES; SPECIES RICHNESS; PLANT
   DIVERSITY; BIODIVERSITY; ECOLOGY; NICHE; ECOSYSTEMS; FRAMEWORK; TRAITS
AB 1. With the use of stable isotopes, new concepts have emerged based on the idea that the ecological niche can be approximated by the isotopic niche defined as a -space area with isotopic values as coordinates. This study aims to (i) redefine functional indices originally based on quantitative biological traits of species and demonstrate the ecological significance of newly defined isotopic functional indices (IFI) in a -isotopic space, (ii) compare IFI using biomass data with existing unweighted isotopic indices using only isotopic compositions.
   2. Using a community-wide approach, we tested IFI using isotopic compositions of a large set of associated species from two marine benthic communities widely reported in coastal shallow waters: the common Amphiura filiformis muddy-sand community and the engineered Haploops nirae sandy-mud community. Biomass and isotopic composition (C-13 and N-15) of all species were measured during four seasons.
   3. IFI were calculated in the isotopic space defined by the two communities, and variations were analysed: (i) isotopic functional richness indices measure the overall extent of the community trophic niche. They are higher in the Haploops community due to a higher diversity in food sources but also to longer food chains. (ii) isotopic functional evenness indices quantify the regularity in species distribution and the density in species packing. They showed that the biomass is concentrated at the edges of the food web in the Haploops community, outside the isotopic range of the main food source. (iii) isotopic functional divergence indices quantify the degree to which species distribution maximizes the divergence. They showed a larger utilization of secondary food sources in the Haploops community.
   4. The IFI variations responded according to expectations overall, based on the extensive knowledge of those communities. Results highlighted that IFI weighted with species biomass provide new insights into how the structure of energy accumulation as biomass between species is likely to underpin community structure and the interplay between structural components of richness, diversity and evenness of biomass distribution.
RI Dubois, Stanislas/F-2939-2010
OI Brind'Amour, Anik/0000-0003-4072-2588; Dubois,
   Stanislas/0000-0002-3326-4892
TC 14
Z9 14
SN 0269-8463
EI 1365-2435
PD OCT
PY 2015
VL 29
IS 10
BP 1350
EP 1360
DI 10.1111/1365-2435.12444
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000362395400013
ER

PT J
AU McCauley, JI
   Meyer, BJ
   Winberg, PC
   Ranson, M
   Skropeta, D
AF McCauley, Janice I.
   Meyer, Barbara J.
   Winberg, Pia C.
   Ranson, Marie
   Skropeta, Danielle
TI Selecting Australian marine macroalgae based on the fatty acid
   composition and anti-inflammatory activity
SO JOURNAL OF APPLIED PHYCOLOGY
DT Article; Proceedings Paper
CT 5th Congress of the International-Society-for-Applied-Phycology -
   Strengthening Algal Industries for the Future
CY JUN 22-27, 2014
CL Sydney, AUSTRALIA
DE Seaweeds; Fatty acid profiles; PUFA; Omega-3; Inflammation; Functional
   foods
ID ALPHA-LINOLENIC ACID; NITRIC-OXIDE; RAW264.7 MACROPHAGES;
   NATURAL-PRODUCTS; PROTEIN-KINASE; ULVA-FASCIATA; HUMAN HEALTH; RED
   ALGAE; SEAWEED; COAST
AB Increasingly, macroalgae are being recognised as a growth opportunity for functional foods and nutritional security in the future. Dominating traits of interest are metabolites that function as anti-inflammatories and are antiproliferative. However, seaweeds from the northern hemisphere dominate this field of research. Australia has a unique flora of macroalgae, and it is poorly understood which species should be targeted for cultivation towards food and health markets. Here, six Australian marine macroalgae were selected for screening of one anti-inflammatory group; n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA). PUFA profiles were determined using gas chromatography-mass spectrometry and multivariate analysis. Thirty-one fatty acids (FA) were identified across the six macroalgal species with C16:0 the dominant FA in all samples, variations across taxa in the saturated FA C10:0, C14:0, C16:0, C18:0 and C20:0 and variations in monounsaturated FA attributed to C16:1 n-7 and C18:1 n-9. For PUFA profiles, all six species had significantly different n-6/n-3 ratios, while the green seaweed Ulva species possessed the lowest n-6/n-3 ratio of 0.4, along with a 2-fold higher C18:3 n-3 to C18:2 n-6 content. Ulva sp. was the only species that contained docosahexaenoic acid. Extracts of both the Ulva sp. and Hormosira banksii showed selective cytotoxicity towards a human pancreatic cancer cell line, while the nonpolar extracts of all six algae species strongly inhibited production of the inflammatory-mediator nitric oxide.
RI Ranson, Marie/A-6324-2008; Winberg, Pia/G-4008-2018
OI Ranson, Marie/0000-0002-5570-9645; Winberg, Pia/0000-0003-2554-4955;
   McCauley, Janice/0000-0003-3351-3243; Skropeta,
   Danielle/0000-0002-2293-7916
TC 11
Z9 11
SN 0921-8971
EI 1573-5176
PD OCT
PY 2015
VL 27
IS 5
BP 2111
EP 2121
DI 10.1007/s10811-014-0465-5
SC Biotechnology & Applied Microbiology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000361891600038
ER

PT J
AU Silva, MAM
   Pinto, ADF
   do Nascimento, LM
   Lins-e-Silva, ACB
   de Lima, ALA
   Rodal, MJN
AF Menezes Silva, Maria Amanda
   Freitas Pinto, Andrea de Vasconcelos
   do Nascimento, Ladivania Medeiros
   Borges Lins-e-Silva, Ana Carolina
   Alves de Lima, Andre Luiz
   Nogueira Rodal, Maria Jesus
TI Does the plant economics spectrum change with secondary succession in
   the forest?
SO TREES-STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION
DT Article
DE Assembly rules; Environmental gradient; Functional integration;
   Functional strategies; Leaf economics spectrum
ID ECOLOGY STRATEGY SCHEME; FUNCTIONAL TRAITS; RAIN-FOREST; DEMOGRAPHIC
   RATES; STEM TRAITS; LEAF; DIVERSITY; WORLDWIDE; TREES; COORDINATION
AB Environmental filters select species with different characteristics. However, these do not exhibit the functional integration of the whole plant level.
   Functional integration at the whole plant level, between the strategies of the various plant organs, needs to be better elucidated to facilitate the understanding of species ecology over an environmental gradient. Thus, hypotheses were proposed that (1) if functional integration exists between organs, the leaf economic spectrum will be a good indicator of the plant economic spectrum, and that (2) processes of community assembly will change over a successional gradient, generating different economic spectra for the plant. To test these predictions, data on eight functional characteristics (leaf, reproductive, stem and whole plant) was collected in 65 species, distributed in six secondary growth forests (three with approximately 17 years and three with approximately 25 years of abandonment) and three mature forests, located within the dense ombrophilous forest domain in the northern coastal region of Pernambuco, Brazil. The results showed no influence of geographic distance (autocorrelation) or phylogeny. Positive correlations were observed between leaf nutrient concentration (N and P), and negative correlations were observed between leaf nutrient concentration and dry matter content. Functional integration at the whole plant level was not observed. On the primary axis of the principal components analysis, only leaf characteristics and wood density were coordinates, following the same strategy, whilst on the secondary axis, only leaf characteristics and maximum height were coordinates. The observed change in species composition and abundance over the gradient was sufficient for changes in the distribution of functional characteristics and, therefore in strategies, to be observed.
OI Lins e Silva, Ana Carolina/0000-0002-0912-7804
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0931-1890
EI 1432-2285
PD OCT
PY 2015
VL 29
IS 5
BP 1521
EP 1531
DI 10.1007/s00468-015-1232-1
SC Forestry
UT WOS:000361429500019
ER

PT J
AU Moran-Ordonez, A
   Pavlova, A
   Pinder, AM
   Sim, L
   Sunnucks, P
   Thompson, RM
   Davis, J
AF Moran-Ordonez, Alejandra
   Pavlova, Alexandra
   Pinder, Adrian M.
   Sim, Lien
   Sunnucks, Paul
   Thompson, Ross M.
   Davis, Jenny
TI Aquatic communities in arid landscapes: local conditions, dispersal
   traits and landscape configuration determine local biodiversity
SO DIVERSITY AND DISTRIBUTIONS
DT Article
DE CIRCUITSCAPE; community structure; functional connectivity; Mantel
   tests; resistance distance; river networks
ID INVERTEBRATE ASSEMBLAGES; NETWORK STRUCTURE; DISTANCE DECAY; NEUTRAL
   THEORY; RIVER; DIVERSITY; ECOLOGY; WATER; CONNECTIVITY; ECOSYSTEMS
AB AimTo understand how environmental conditions and landscape structure interact at different spatial scales to shape the community composition of arid zone aquatic invertebrates with different dispersal abilities.
   LocationAustralia.
   MethodsFor each of five drainage basins and for their encompassing region (Pilbara), we built matrices of dissimilarities in presence-absence patterns of aquatic invertebrate community composition. This was carried out for all taxa collectively and separately for five dispersal trait groups: obligate aquatics, passive aerial dispersers, animals moving by aerial phoresy, weak and strong fliers. We analysed correlations between community dissimilarities and (1) dissimilarities in local environmental conditions, (2) geographic distances and (3) landscape resistance distances among the sites from which invertebrates were sampled. Calculation of landscape resistances accounted for longitudinal connectivity along the river channels (least-cost-path), lateral connectivity between streams and the potential effects of rugged topography on invertebrate dispersal.
   ResultsLocal environmental factors and landscape resistances explained differences in community composition at the regional scale. In basins with complex topography, local environmental conditions were the main factor explaining community dissimilarities in most dispersal groups. Conversely, in basins where flatter topography meant that moderate to high lateral connectivity between streams is possible, the spatial configuration of the dendritic network determined the community composition of most dispersal trait groups. Geographic and least-cost-path distances were poor predictors of community composition. None of the groups showed a consistent correlation with environmental factors alone, or just landscape resistances, across all basins.
   Main conclusionsLocal environmental conditions, hydrological connectivity and landscape resistance to dispersal are all important influences on community composition of arid zone aquatic invertebrates. The impact of each of these factors varies with dispersal trait group and spatial configuration of basins: the importance of lateral connectivity for explaining a substantial proportion of community composition points to a major role of flooding regimes in maintaining biological communities.
RI Pavlova, Alexandra/H-4749-2014
OI Pavlova, Alexandra/0000-0001-9455-4124; Thompson,
   Ross/0000-0002-5287-2455; Moran-Ordonez, Alejandra/0000-0002-5815-6089;
   Sunnucks, Paul/0000-0002-8139-7059
TC 15
Z9 16
SN 1366-9516
EI 1472-4642
PD OCT
PY 2015
VL 21
IS 10
BP 1230
EP 1241
DI 10.1111/ddi.12342
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000361204100009
ER

PT J
AU Orzechowski, EA
   Lockwood, R
   Byrnes, JEK
   Anderson, SC
   Finnegan, S
   Finkel, ZV
   Harnik, PG
   Lindberg, DR
   Liow, LH
   Lotze, HK
   McClain, CR
   McGuire, JL
   O'Dea, A
   Pandolfi, JM
   Simpson, C
   Tittensor, DP
AF Orzechowski, Emily A.
   Lockwood, Rowan
   Byrnes, Jarrett E. K.
   Anderson, Sean C.
   Finnegan, Seth
   Finkel, Zoe V.
   Harnik, Paul G.
   Lindberg, David R.
   Liow, Lee Hsiang
   Lotze, Heike K.
   McClain, Craig R.
   McGuire, Jenny L.
   O'Dea, Aaron
   Pandolfi, John M.
   Simpson, Carl
   Tittensor, Derek P.
TI Marine extinction risk shaped by trait-environment interactions over 500
   million years
SO GLOBAL CHANGE BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE differential extinction risk; extinction selectivity; geographic range;
   life habit; mass extinction; mollusk; survivorship
ID PERMIAN MASS EXTINCTION; TAXONOMIC DIVERSITY GRADIENTS; CARBON-ISOTOPE
   EXCURSIONS; RECENT BIVALVE FAUNAS; FOSSIL RECORD; CLIMATE-CHANGE;
   SELECTIVE EXTINCTION; OCEAN ACIDIFICATION; GEOGRAPHIC RANGE; SOUTH CHINA
AB Perhaps the most pressing issue in predicting biotic responses to present and future global change is understanding how environmental factors shape the relationship between ecological traits and extinction risk. The fossil record provides millions of years of insight into how extinction selectivity (i.e., differential extinction risk) is shaped by interactions between ecological traits and environmental conditions. Numerous paleontological studies have examined trait-based extinction selectivity; however, the extent to which these patterns are shaped by environmental conditions is poorly understood due to a lack of quantitative synthesis across studies. We conducted a meta-analysis of published studies on fossil marine bivalves and gastropods that span 458 million years to uncover how global environmental and geochemical changes covary with trait-based extinction selectivity. We focused on geographic range size and life habit (i.e., infaunal vs. epifaunal), two of the most important and commonly examined predictors of extinction selectivity. We used geochemical proxies related to global climate, as well as indicators of ocean acidification, to infer average global environmental conditions. Life-habit selectivity is weakly dependent on environmental conditions, with infaunal species relatively buffered from extinction during warmer climate states. In contrast, the odds of taxa with broad geographic ranges surviving an extinction (>2500km for genera, >500km for species) are on average three times greater than narrow-ranging taxa (estimate of odds ratio: 2.8, 95% confidence interval=2.3-3.5), regardless of the prevailing global environmental conditions. The environmental independence of geographic range size extinction selectivity emphasizes the critical role of geographic range size in setting conservation priorities.
RI Pandolfi, John/A-3121-2009; Liow, Lee Hsiang/E-3481-2010; McGuire,
   Jenny/G-8819-2011
OI Pandolfi, John/0000-0003-3047-6694; Liow, Lee
   Hsiang/0000-0002-3732-6069; McGuire, Jenny/0000-0002-0663-6902; Byrnes,
   Jarrett/0000-0002-9791-9472; Simpson, Carl/0000-0003-0719-4437; McClain,
   Craig/0000-0003-0574-428X
TC 10
Z9 10
SN 1354-1013
EI 1365-2486
PD OCT
PY 2015
VL 21
IS 10
BP 3595
EP 3607
DI 10.1111/gcb.12963
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000360994500004
PM 26190141
ER

PT J
AU Thiault, L
   Bevilacqua, S
   Terlizzi, A
   Claudet, J
AF Thiault, Lauric
   Bevilacqua, Stanislao
   Terlizzi, Antonio
   Claudet, Joachim
TI Taxonomic relatedness does not reflect coherent ecological response of
   fish to protection
SO BIOLOGICAL CONSERVATION
DT Article
DE Fish multivariate patterns; Functional similarity; Marine protected
   areas; Null models; Species surrogacy; Taxonomic sufficiency
ID MARINE RESERVES; SPECIES SURROGACY; ARTISANAL FISHERIES; MEDITERRANEAN
   SEA; FUNCTIONAL TRAITS; RESOLUTION LEVELS; AREAS; ASSEMBLAGES;
   SUFFICIENCY; COMMUNITY
AB Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) are increasingly used for biodiversity conservation and the management of sustainable fisheries. The use of taxonomic surrogates in routine monitoring of the reserve effects on fish assemblages may represent a promising method due to its substantial technical and economic benefits. However, higher taxonomic ranks should be used as surrogates with caution, especially for fish, where the approach is still virtually undocumented. This study aims to shed light on relationships between taxonomic relatedness and ecological Similarity, which is crucial to assess the relevance of species surrogacy to reflect species-level information and detect changes in fish related to protection regimes. By analyzing data from a Mediterranean MPA, we show that rather being related to taxonomic relationships, the ability of higher taxa to reflect species-level patterns was explained in terms of aggregation level and distribution of species within taxa. Null models using random aggregations of species were created to identify the best surrogates able to depict changes in responses of assemblages to protection observed at the species-level. Comparison of null model predictions with the more classical higher-taxon approach revealed that the latter was not reliable because, unlike null model outcomes, surrogates determined empirically were not relevant for other subsequent independent monitoring. The effectiveness of species surrogates to depict changes in responses of assemblages to protection observed at the species-level depended (1) on the numerical resolution of the aggregation and (2) the magnitude of differences between protected and unprotected locations. Such findings suggest that surrogacy approaches may be applied for routine monitoring of Mediterranean reef fish communities, although mere empirical determinations of sufficient taxonomy seems to be not reliable, legitimizing the use of alternative methods based on null models. Guidelines for the careful use of species surrogacy in the ecological evaluation of MPAs on fish assemblages are provided. (C) 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
RI Claudet, Joachim/C-6335-2008
OI Claudet, Joachim/0000-0001-6295-1061; Bevilacqua,
   Stanislao/0000-0002-6417-7134; Thiault, Lauric/0000-0002-5572-7632;
   Terlizzi, Antonio/0000-0001-5968-4548
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 0006-3207
EI 1873-2917
PD OCT
PY 2015
VL 190
BP 98
EP 106
DI 10.1016/j.biocon.2015.06.002
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000358972200012
ER

PT J
AU Sacco, AG
   Rui, AM
   Bergmann, FB
   Muller, SC
   Hartz, SM
AF Sacco, Anne G.
   Rui, Ana Maria
   Bergmann, Fabiane B.
   Mueller, Sandra C.
   Hartz, Sandra M.
TI Reduction in taxonomic and functional bird diversity in an urban area in
   Southern Brazil
SO IHERINGIA SERIE ZOOLOGIA
DT Article
DE Biotic homogenization; Rao's functional diversity; wetlands; Pampa biome
ID LAND-USE; BIOTIC HOMOGENIZATION; RURAL GRADIENT; URBANIZATION;
   COMMUNITIES; REDUNDANCY; CITY; CONSERVATION; ASSEMBLAGES; ENVIRONMENTS
AB Urbanization is a globally process studied and considered one of the most drastic environmental disturb on biodiversity. This study aimed to evaluate how different intensities of urbanization act in the structure of birds in a medium size city inserted in a wetland area. In addition to the traditional metrics richness, abundance and taxonomic composition, it was found as the functional diversity and redundancy of birds are influenced by urban gradient. The urban area studied was the Pelotas city (31 degrees 46"S, 52 degrees 20"W) situated at the southernmost part of Brazil in a humid region of Pampa biome. A total of 216 fixed observation points along an urbanization gradient were used to sample the avifauna and four independent variables: number of trees, number of buildings with two or more floors, presence of aquatic habitat, and presence of open habitat. Functional traits of species characterized the biomass, diet, forage substrate and nesting substrate. The richness, abundance and functional diversity of avifauna were negatively related to the increase of urban intensity while the redundancy, different from the expected, did not respond to the urban gradient. The traits related to the areas with more intense urbanization (building with two or more floors) were: preference for foraging in the air, omnivory and cavity nesting. Areas with less intense urbanization (more trees and open habitats) were related to the preference for nesting on vegetation and in lower sites, and carnivory. The study showed the importance of the presence of open and aquatic habitats for the avifauna, landscape features typically not cited in urban studies, which highlight the need to adequate the mitigation actions for conservation efforts inside urban habitats according to the regional pool of species.
OI Muller, Sandra/0000-0002-6316-2897; Hartz, Sandra
   Maria/0000-0002-6536-1072
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 0073-4721
EI 1678-4766
PD SEP 30
PY 2015
VL 105
IS 3
BP 276
EP 287
DI 10.1590/1678-476620151053276287
SC Zoology
UT WOS:000366197400003
ER

PT J
AU Valdivia, N
   Diaz, MJ
   Garrido, I
   Gomez, I
AF Valdivia, Nelson
   Jose Diaz, Maria
   Garrido, Ignacio
   Gomez, Ivan
TI Consistent Richness-Biomass Relationship across Environmental Gradients
   in a Marine Macroalgal-Dominated Subtidal Community on the Western
   Antarctic Peninsula
SO PLOS ONE
DT Article
ID KING-GEORGE ISLAND; ECOSYSTEM PRODUCTIVITY; FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY;
   BIODIVERSITY LOSS; CURRENT KNOWLEDGE; SPECIES RICHNESS; ICE SCOUR;
   PERFORMANCE; HYPOTHESIS; INSURANCE
AB Biodiversity loss has spurred the biodiversity-ecosystem functioning research over a range of ecosystems. In Antarctica, however, the relationship of taxonomic and functional diversity with ecosystem properties (e.g., community biomass) has received less attention, despite the presence of sharp and dynamic environmental stress gradients that might modulate these properties. Here, we investigated whether the richness-biomass relationship in macrobenthic subtidal communities is still apparent after accounting for environmental stress gradients in Fildes Bay, King George Island, Antarctica. Measurements of biomass of mobile and sessile macrobenthic taxa were conducted in the austral summer 2013/4 across two environmental stress gradients: distance from nearest glaciers and subtidal depth (from 5 to 30 m). In general, community biomass increased with distance from glaciers and water depth. However, generalised additive models showed that distance from glaciers and depth accounted for negligible proportions of variation in the number of functional groups (i.e., functional richness) and community biomass when compared to taxonomic richness. Functional richness and community biomass were positive and saturating functions of taxonomic richness. Large endemic, canopy-forming brown algae of the order Desmarestiales dominated the community biomass across both gradients. Accordingly, differences in the composition of taxa accounted for a significant and large proportion (51%) of variation in community biomass in comparison with functional richness (10%). Our results suggest that the environmental factors here analysed may be less important than biodiversity in shaping mesoscale (several km) biomass patterns in this Antarctic system. We suggest that further manipulative, hypothesis-driven research should address the role of biodiversity and species' functional traits in the responses of Antarctic subtidal communities to environmental variation.
TC 4
Z9 5
SN 1932-6203
PD SEP 18
PY 2015
VL 10
IS 9
AR e0138582
DI 10.1371/journal.pone.0138582
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000361790200131
PM 26381149
ER

PT J
AU Ganeshamurthy, AN
   Reddy, YTN
AF Ganeshamurthy, A. N.
   Reddy, Y. T. N.
TI Fitness of Mango for Colonization in Low Fertility Soils and Dry Lands:
   Examination of Leaf Life-Span, Leaf Nutrient Resorption, and Nutrient
   Use Efficiency in Elite Mango Varieties
SO AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH
DT Article
DE Dry land; Leaf life-span; Low fertility soil; Mango varieties; Nutrient
   resorption efficiency; Nutrient use efficiency
ID NITROGEN RESORPTION; SENESCING LEAVES; EVERGREEN; CONSERVATION; PLANTS;
   TREES; RETRANSLOCATION; AVAILABILITY; DETERMINANTS; PERSISTENCE
AB Mangoes are native to India. They are grown extensively in all agro-ecological regions of South and Southeast Asia. At present, several varieties of mango are under cultivation whose suitability to different agro-ecological regions differs with their origin. The present study aimed to investigate the suitability of mangoes for colonization in low fertility soils and dry-land areas by examining various plant traits, like leaf life-span (LLS), leaf chlorophyll, leaf mass, leaf nutrient resorption efficiency, nutrient proficiency, and nutrient use efficiency (NUE) in elite mango varieties originated from diverse environment, like humid coastal regions under nutrient-poor environment through semiarid tropics under moderate nutrient availability environment to subtropical regions under fairly nutrient-rich environment. The mean LLS varied between 2.663 and 3.901 years. The varieties coming from low fertility environment had long LLS indicating their adaptation to low nutrient availability. Besides, long LLS permitted longer utilization of nutrients in the leaf biomass thus contributing to the improvement of NUE. On the other hand, the varieties coming from lower nutrient habitats had lower nutrient resorption efficiencies compared to those from nutrient fertile environments. However, long LLS are also associated with other leaf traits that reduce instantaneous productivity, which might reduce the growth rate of leaf biomass and shorten the functional life of the leaf. Thus it is concluded that the varieties having longer LLS are more suitable for cultivation on low fertility soils and dry lands than those with shorter LLS.
TC 0
Z9 1
SN 2249-720X
EI 2249-7218
PD SEP
PY 2015
VL 4
IS 3
BP 254
EP 260
DI 10.1007/s40003-015-0164-8
SC Agriculture
UT WOS:000366136200005
ER

PT J
AU Nordstrom, MC
   Aarnio, K
   Tornroos, A
   Bonsdorff, E
AF Nordstrom, M. C.
   Aarnio, K.
   Tornroos, A.
   Bonsdorff, E.
TI Nestedness of trophic links and biological traits in a marine food web
SO ECOSPHERE
DT Article
DE Baltic Sea; benthos; complementarity; functional diversity;
   predator-prey interactions; redundancy; trophic interactions
ID BODY-MASS CONSTRAINTS; ECOLOGICAL NETWORKS; ECOSYSTEM FUNCTION; SIZE
   STRUCTURE; LIFE-HISTORY; BALTIC SEA; BIODIVERSITY; COMMUNITIES; COMPLEX;
   EXTINCTION
AB To understand the consequences of changes in diversity we need to consider the functional characteristics (traits) of species, as well as the trophic setting the taxa are part of. These two approaches have rarely been conducted in an integrated manner, although we know that trophic structure is an important driver of community functioning, and that biological traits, in particular body size, in turn determine which species interact. In this study, we assessed how structural food-web attributes (nestedness, generality, vulnerability) relate to multiple biological traits of interacting taxa. We found that the inherent complexity of a shallow subtidal trophic network of benthic macroinvertebrates and fish in the northern Baltic Sea contained identifiable and specific patterns: the feeding interactions were highly nested, both in terms of prey taxonomy and biological traits, suggesting trophic redundancy rather than trophic complementarity. Both trait diversity and trait redundancy of interacting species increased as a function of predator generality and prey vulnerability. These central food-web metrics, predator generality and prey vulnerability, were dependent on body size, which emerged as a fundamental trait. Body size, environmental habitat and body design were the relatively most important prey traits distinguishing between diets of smaller vs. larger predators, revealing morphological and spatial dimensions of predator trophic niches in the study community. We suggest continued development of an approach integrating functional diversity with the food web to effectively assess community structure, function and species interactions, and ultimately identify ecological impacts in communities undergoing environmental change in the Anthropocene.
RI Nordstrom, Marie/C-8956-2012
OI Nordstrom, Marie/0000-0001-5763-1813; Tornroos, Anna/0000-0002-5790-2449
TC 7
Z9 7
SN 2150-8925
PD SEP
PY 2015
VL 6
IS 9
AR 161
DI 10.1890/ES14-00515.1
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000362121600018
ER

PT J
AU Andersen, KH
   Aksnes, DL
   Berge, T
   Fiksen, O
   Visser, A
AF Andersen, Ken H.
   Aksnes, Dag L.
   Berge, Terje
   Fiksen, Oyvind
   Visser, Andre
TI Modelling emergent trophic strategies in plankton
SO JOURNAL OF PLANKTON RESEARCH
DT Article
DE trade-off; optimization; mixotrophy
ID COST-BENEFIT-ANALYSIS; PHYTOPLANKTON GROWTH; NUTRIENT-UPTAKE; CELL-SIZE;
   RESOURCE-ALLOCATION; TRADE-OFFS; FOOD WEBS; PATTERNS; DIATOM;
   COMMUNITIES
AB Plankton are typically divided into phytoplankton and zooplankton in marine ecosystem models. Yet, most protists in the photic zone engage in some degree of phagotrophy, and it has been suggested that trophic strategy is really a continuum between pure phototrophs (phytoplankton) and pure phagotrophs (unicellular zooplankton). Such a continuum of trophic strategies is well represented by trait-based modelling techniques. A key model ingredient is the size of individual cells, as size constrains affinities for nutrient uptake, photosynthesis and active encounter with other cells. We outline a general trait-based model of a unicellular planktonic organism where size is a central trait and where nutrient uptake, photosynthesis and phagotrophy are determined by investments into these functions and by the physical constraints imposed by organism size. This framework provides simple predictions of how trophic strategy correlates with size.
RI Fiksen, Oyvind/F-1771-2011
OI Fiksen, Oyvind/0000-0002-9687-5842; Visser, Andre/0000-0002-1604-7263;
   Andersen, Ken Haste/0000-0002-8478-3430
TC 12
Z9 13
SN 0142-7873
EI 1464-3774
PD SEP-OCT
PY 2015
VL 37
IS 5
BP 862
EP 868
DI 10.1093/plankt/fbv054
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000361993700003
ER

PT J
AU Baldrighi, E
   Manini, E
AF Baldrighi, Elisa
   Manini, Elena
TI Deep-sea meiofauna and macrofauna diversity and functional diversity:
   are they related?
SO MARINE BIODIVERSITY
DT Article; Proceedings Paper
CT Meiofauna International Workshop on MeioScool - A Dive in a Microscopic
   World
CY NOV 26-29, 2013
CL Brest, FRANCE
DE Meiofauna; Macrofauna; Diversity; Functional diversity; Deep sea
ID MARINE BENTHIC ASSEMBLAGES; EASTERN MEDITERRANEAN SEA; TRAITS ANALYSIS
   BTA; GULF-OF-MEXICO; SPECIES-DIVERSITY; COMMUNITY STRUCTURE; ECOSYSTEM
   PROCESSES; STANDING STOCK; NE ATLANTIC; FOOD WEBS
AB Meiofauna and macrofauna are closely linked by numerous types of interactions, but comparative studies are rare. It has been postulated that meiofauna and macrofauna diversities are related, and that a higher functional diversity of meiobenthic and/or macrobenthic organisms can enhance a higher functional diversity. A simultaneous study of the deep Mediterranean sea meiobenthic and macrobenthic communities was conducted, from the west to central-eastern basin and from 1,200 to 2,700 m depth. We posed the following questions: 1) are meiofauna and macrofauna diversities related? 2) Does a higher diversity enhance a higher functional diversity? and 3) Does the relationship between diversity and functional diversity change considering different benthic size classes and taxa? In order to answer to our questions, the biodiversity and functional diversity of meiofauna and macrofauna were analysed, with a focus on three target groups: meiobenthic nematodes, macrobenthic nematodes and polychaetes. Meiobenthic nematodes and macrofaunal diversity appeared to be related only in terms of turnover diversity. A cross-taxon analysis on macrobenthic nematode and polychaete diversity and meiofauna diversity revealed a positive relationship in all cases that were studied. Considering functional diversity, many relationships emerged between the two benthic components. A higher meiobenthic nematode diversity did not enhance a higher functional diversity. A higher macrofauna diversity enhanced a higher functional diversity, but not for all macrobenthic taxa (i.e., nematodes). We can conclude that the diversity-functional diversity relationship changed across different size classes, even when the same taxon was considered. The diversity-functional diversity relationship changed across taxa even if they belonged to the same size class.
RI Manini, Elena/C-2032-2015
OI Manini, Elena/0000-0002-8990-2929
TC 5
Z9 5
SN 1867-1616
EI 1867-1624
PD SEP
PY 2015
VL 45
IS 3
BP 469
EP 488
DI 10.1007/s12526-015-0333-9
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000361755600011
ER

PT J
AU Lauwerier, RCGM
AF Lauwerier, Roel C. G. M.
TI Polled cattle in the Roman Netherlands
SO LIVESTOCK SCIENCE
DT Article
DE Polled cattle; Hornlessness; Roman Netherlands; Archaeology
AB Most cattle in the Netherlands have been deliberately dehorned, which some people consider to be a cruel practice. But the breeding of genetically hornless (or polled) cattle is also regarded as unnatural and cruel to animals. Nevertheless, this is a practice which, like elsewhere in Europe, was also common here in the past. Unlike elsewhere in Europe, in the Netherlands polledness, a dominant trait, occurred mainly in the Roman period and disappeared again in the Middle Ages. Polled cattle were particularly common in the coastal area beyond the borders of the Roman Empire, where up to 40% of animals were hornless. By contrast, to the south of the border, polled cattle were rare. No polled animals have so far been found in Nijmegen, at the time the country's most important military and civilian centre. The question is why this is the case, and why polled cattle subsequently disappeared from the Netherlands. There is little evidence to explain the presence of polled cattle on one side of the Roman border, their near absence on the other, and their total disappearance after the Roman period on the basis of natural selection. Nor do functional considerations - superiority as a source of food or supplier of tractive power - provide us with any conclusive answers. The most likely explanation is that it was mainly emotional and aesthetic considerations that led farmers and other users of cattle to decide what a 'good' cow was, and that was a cow with horns. The fact that polled cattle occurred in the coastal area during the Roman period may be associated with a different ideal, and possibly also with a lack of economic power that prevented farmers from being selective. After the Roman period, the desire for 'good' horned cattle will have caused the disappearance of the dominant polled cattle. A growing demand for horn as a raw material for the manufacture of objects might also have played a role. These factors should probably be viewed in the context of an influx of other breeds brought by new population groups that 'drove out' the old cattle populations. The current debate in the Netherlands as to the desirability of breeding polled cattle would appear to be nothing new, having already exercised the minds of farmers centuries ago. (C) 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 1871-1413
EI 1878-0490
PD SEP
PY 2015
VL 179
SI SI
BP 71
EP 79
DI 10.1016/j.livsci.2015.05.018
SC Agriculture
UT WOS:000360951000009
ER

PT J
AU Behl, S
   Stibor, H
AF Behl, Stephan
   Stibor, Herwig
TI Prey diversity and prey identity affect herbivore performance on
   different time scales in a long term aquatic food-web experiment
SO OIKOS
DT Article
ID PRODUCER-GRAZER SYSTEMS; PHYTOPLANKTON COMMUNITIES; TROPHIC
   INTERACTIONS; SPECIES-DIVERSITY; ECOSYSTEM PRODUCTIVITY; CONSUMER
   IDENTITY; FUNCTIONAL-ROLE; BIODIVERSITY; COMPLEMENTARITY; BIOMASS
AB The question whether and how diversity-mediated productivity at the base of food-webs influences adjacent trophic levels is still unclear. Experiments revealed negative effects on consumers due to the increasing dominance of inedible species under grazing pressure, and positive effects due to a greater variety of prey resources. We experimentally investigate two more hypotheses, which have not been addressed in detail so far: first, more diverse primary producer communities potentially use limiting resources more efficiently, and are, therefore, more productive. This effect can be considered functionally similar to a direct enrichment with limiting resources, potentially resulting in a higher stochastic risk of herbivore extinction (paradox of enrichment'). Second, in a stable environment, enclosed primary producer communities should evolve towards a climax state', eventually dominated by one or few prey species. Therefore, long-term diversity effects in producer communities should more likely result from the specific traits of the dominating species, than from complementarity. To address these hypotheses, we conducted long-term laboratory experiments, exposing the freshwater grazer Daphnia magna to a gradient of algal species richness (1, 2, 4 or 8 edible chlorophyte species). The experiments were run in batch cultures, without exchange of growth medium after the start of the experiment. Six parameters related to Daphnia population demography, biomass accrual, and stability were followed and determined over a period of up to 263 days. Producer diversity exhibited strong positive effects on the short-term performance of grazers (first reproduction, first population peak), and on grazer mean standing stocks. However, herbivore long-term dynamics (day of extinction and temporal stability) depended on prey species identity, namely the presence of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. Our experiments suggest that both prey diversity and identity can have positive effects on consumer performance, but act on different time scales.
TC 5
Z9 5
SN 0030-1299
EI 1600-0706
PD SEP
PY 2015
VL 124
IS 9
BP 1192
EP 1202
DI 10.1111/oik.01463
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000360823400009
ER

PT J
AU Olli, K
   Klais, R
   Tamminen, T
AF Olli, Kalle
   Klais, Riina
   Tamminen, Timo
TI Rehabilitating the cyanobacteria - niche partitioning, resource use
   efficiency and phytoplankton community structure during diazotrophic
   cyanobacterial blooms
SO JOURNAL OF ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE Aphanizomenon; aquatic plant ecology; Baltic Sea; community assembly;
   functional diversity; nitrogen fixation; Nodularia; nutrient limitation;
   phylogenetic diversity
ID NORTHERN BALTIC SEA; COPEPOD EURYTEMORA-AFFINIS;
   APHANIZOMENON-FLOS-AQUAE; MARINE NITROGEN-FIXATION; LONG-TERM CHANGES;
   NUTRIENT LIMITATION; NODULARIA-SPUMIGENA; ORGANIC-MATTER; PACIFIC-OCEAN;
   N-2 FIXATION
AB Blooms of nitrogen-fixing cyanobacteria are recurrent phenomena in marine and freshwater habitats, and their supplying role in aquatic biogeochemical cycles is generally considered vital. The objective of this study was to analyse whether an increasing proportion of nitrogen-fixing cyanobacteria affects (i) the composition of the non-diazotrophic component of ambient phytoplankton communities and (ii) resource use efficiency (RUE; ratio of Chl a to total nutrients) - an important ecosystem function. We hypothesize that diazotrophs increase community P use and decrease N use efficiencies, as new N is brought into the system, relaxing N, and concomitantly aggravating P limitation. We test this by analysing an extensive data set from the Baltic Sea (>3700 quantitative phytoplankton samples), known to harbour conspicuous and recurrent blooms of Nodularia spumigena and Aphanizomenon sp. System-level phosphorus use efficiency (RUEP) was positively related to high proportion of diazotrophic cyanobacteria, suggesting aggravation of phosphorus limitation. However, concomitant decrease of nitrogen use efficiency (RUEN) was not observed. Nodularia spumigena, a dominant diazotroph and a notorious toxin producer, had a significantly stronger relationship with RUEP, compared to the competing non-toxic Aphanizomenon sp., confirming niche differentiation in P acquisition strategies between the major bloom-forming cyanobacterial species in the Baltic Sea. Nodularia occurrences were associated with stronger temperature stratification in more offshore environments, indicating higher reliance on insitu P regeneration. By using constrained and unconstrained ordination, permutational multivariate analysis of variance and local similarity analysis, we show that diazotrophic cyanobacteria explained no more than a few percentage of the ambient phytoplankton community variation. The analyses furthermore yielded rather evenly distributed negative and positive effects on individual co-occurring phytoplankton taxa, with no obvious phylogenetic or functional trait-based patterns.Synthesis. Our study reveals that despite the widely acknowledged noxious impacts of cyanobacterial blooms, the overall effect on phytoplankton community structure is minor. There are no predominantly positive or negative associations with ambient phytoplankton species. Species-specific niche differences in cyanobacterial resource acquisition affect important ecosystem functions, such as biomass production per unit limiting resource.
RI Olli, Kalle/G-5389-2010
OI Olli, Kalle/0000-0002-7943-5714; Klais, Riina/0000-0003-2895-1273
TC 10
Z9 10
SN 0022-0477
EI 1365-2745
PD SEP
PY 2015
VL 103
IS 5
BP 1153
EP 1164
DI 10.1111/1365-2745.12437
SC Plant Sciences; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000360216400006
ER

PT J
AU O'Farrell, S
   Salguero-Gomez, R
   van Rooij, JM
   Mumby, PJ
AF O'Farrell, Shay
   Salguero-Gomez, Roberto
   van Rooij, Jules M.
   Mumby, Peter J.
TI Disentangling trait-based mortality in species with decoupled size and
   age
SO JOURNAL OF ANIMAL ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE agent-based models; coral reef fish; demography; individual-based
   models; life histories; population dynamics; post-settlement mortality;
   predation; senescence; size escape
ID PARROTFISH SPARISOMA-VIRIDE; CORAL-REEF FISH; INDETERMINATE GROWTH;
   MARINE FISH; EVOLUTION; MODELS; VARIABILITY; SENESCENCE; DENSITY;
   PARAMETERS
AB Size and age are fundamental organismal traits, and typically, both are good predictors of mortality. For many species, however, size and age predict mortality in ontogenetically opposing directions. Specifically, mortality due to predation is often more intense on smaller individuals whereas mortality due to senescence impacts, by definition, on older individuals. When size-based and age-based mortality are independent in this manner, modelling mortality in both traits is often necessary. Classical approaches, such as Leslie or Lefkovitch matrices, usually require the model to infer the state of one trait from the state of the other, for example by assuming that explicitly modelled age (or stage) class structure provides implicit information on underlying size-class structure, as is the case in many species. However, the assumption that one trait informs on the other is challenged when size and age are decoupled, as often occurs in invertebrates, amphibians, fish, reptiles and plants. In these cases, age-structured models may perform poorly at capturing size-based mortality, and vice versa. We offer a solution to this dilemma, relaxing the assumption that class structure in one trait is inferable from class structure in another trait. Using empirical data from a reef fish, Sparisoma viride (Scaridae), we demonstrate how an individual-based model (IBM) can be implemented to model mortality as explicit, independent and simultaneous functions of individual size and age - an approach that mimics the effects of mortality in many wild populations. By validating this multitrait IBM' against three independent lines of empirical data, we determine that the approach produces more convincing predictions of size-class structure, longevity and post-settlement mortality for S.viride than do the trait-independent or single-trait mortality models tested. Multitrait IBMs also allow trait-based mortality to be modelled either additively or multiplicatively, and individual variability in growth rates can be accommodated. Consequently, we propose that the approach may be useful in fields that may benefit from disentangling, or investigating interactions among, size-based and age-based demographic processes, including comparative demography (e.g. life-history consequences of resource patchiness) and conservation biology (e.g. impacts of invasive predators on size structure but not life span of natives).
RI van Rooij, Jules/C-5858-2008; Salguero-Gomez, Roberto/N-6016-2016;
   Mumby, Peter/F-9914-2010
OI van Rooij, Jules/0000-0001-5009-3389; Salguero-Gomez,
   Roberto/0000-0002-6085-4433; Mumby, Peter/0000-0002-6297-9053
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0021-8790
EI 1365-2656
PD SEP
PY 2015
VL 84
IS 5
BP 1446
EP 1456
DI 10.1111/1365-2656.12399
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Zoology
UT WOS:000360093400030
PM 25989511
ER

PT J
AU Ricotta, C
   Carboni, M
   Acosta, ATR
AF Ricotta, Carlo
   Carboni, Marta
   Acosta, Alicia T. R.
TI Let the concept of indicator species be functional!
SO JOURNAL OF VEGETATION SCIENCE
DT Article
DE coastal dunes; diagnostic species; ecological value; fidelity; indicator
   value; plant functional traits
ID VEGETATION CLASSIFICATION; GENERAL COEFFICIENT; COASTAL DUNES;
   DIVERSITY; COMMUNITIES; PATTERNS; FIDELITY; TRAITS; ASSOCIATIONS;
   SIMILARITY
AB AimsThe identification of diagnostic or indicator species with high fidelity to a given group of sites is an important step for the ecological characterization of habitats or community types. The determination of the degree of fidelity to a target group is traditionally performed by analysing the concentration of species occurrences or abundances in different groups of sites. Surprisingly, although one of the main purposes of indicator species analysis is to give ecological meaning to groups of sites, none of the methods proposed to date take into account the functional ecology of diagnostic species. Therefore, the question we address here is: can we use functional traits of species to improve the diagnostic value of indicator species?
   LocationSand dune communities in central Italy.
   MethodsIn this paper we propose a two-step procedure for incorporating the functional traits of a given species in the evaluation of its diagnostic value. For a given set of plots that are classified into different groups, first the indicator species that best characterize each group of plots are identified with the usual statistical tools based on species occurrences. Next, the functional association between the indicator species and the target groups of plots is tested by measuring the functional distance between the indicator species and the centroids of all plots in the target group. A species is positively associated with a group if its mean functional distance from all plot centroids in the group is significantly lower than expected.
   ResultsIn this example, we show that the functional association of the indicator species with a given habitat type is represented by less species than the association highlighted solely through species occurrences and/or abundances. This subset of species appears to better characterize the functional ecology of coastal dune plant assemblages and shows a higher diagnostic value in comparison with those obtained through the traditional indicator analysis.
   ConclusionsAs functional traits are the main ecological attributes by which different species influence ecosystem processes, we believe that the methodology proposed here provides a relevant tool for ecological applications as distinct as vegetation science, conservation biology or landscape management.
RI Carboni, Marta/A-2658-2012; Acosta, Alicia T. R,/E-3653-2012
OI Carboni, Marta/0000-0002-9348-4758; Acosta, Alicia T.
   R,/0000-0001-6572-3187; RICOTTA, Carlo/0000-0003-0818-3959
TC 6
Z9 6
SN 1100-9233
EI 1654-1103
PD SEP
PY 2015
VL 26
IS 5
BP 839
EP 847
DI 10.1111/jvs.12291
SC Plant Sciences; Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Forestry
UT WOS:000359868800004
ER

PT J
AU Grasset, C
   Delolme, C
   Arthaud, F
   Bornette, G
AF Grasset, Charlotte
   Delolme, Cecile
   Arthaud, Florent
   Bornette, Gudrun
TI Carbon allocation in aquatic plants with contrasting strategies: the
   role of habitat nutrient content
SO JOURNAL OF VEGETATION SCIENCE
DT Article
DE Adaptive strategy; Carbon compounds; Functional types; Lignin;
   Phenotypic plasticity; Starch; Storage; Structural compounds
ID FRESH-WATER MACROPHYTES; LIFE-SPAN; QUANTITATIVE-DETERMINATION;
   MINERAL-NUTRITION; WILD PLANTS; LEAF SIZE; TRAITS; ECONOMICS; GROWTH;
   CARBOHYDRATE
AB QuestionsThe link between the carbon composition of aquatic plants and (1) plant strategies and (2) habitat nutrient availability has received little attention. We tested whether three aquatic species belonging to the three adaptive strategies defined by Grime (ruderal, stress tolerant and competitive) had contrasting carbon allocation patterns, and if these patterns varied in the same way between populations distributed along a gradient of habitat nutrient content.
   LocationWetlands in the northern Rhone River Basin, France.
   MethodsThe three species were sampled in 17 wetlands along a gradient of nutrient content in the northern Rhone River Basin. In each population sampled, we measured plant water content, C/N ratio, structural compounds (lignin and structural polysaccharides) and storage compounds (free sugars and starch) in two seasons (spring and autumn 2012).
   ResultsThe stress-tolerant species had higher content of structural compounds than the competitive and ruderal species. The content of storage compounds was higher in the competitive and stress-tolerant species compared to the ruderal species. Allocation of carbon compounds varied with habitat nutrient content in different ways for the three species, suggesting contrasting plasticities, possibly linked to plant strategy.
   ConclusionPlant strategies and habitat nutrient content are likely key drivers in plant carbon allocation and should be taken into account when studying interactions between habitat and plant quality.
RI bornette, gudrun/J-6404-2017
OI bornette, gudrun/0000-0002-2242-0060; Arthaud,
   Florent/0000-0002-9632-264X
TC 5
Z9 5
SN 1100-9233
EI 1654-1103
PD SEP
PY 2015
VL 26
IS 5
BP 946
EP 955
DI 10.1111/jvs.12298
SC Plant Sciences; Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Forestry
UT WOS:000359868800013
ER

PT J
AU Sunday, JM
   Pecl, GT
   Frusher, S
   Hobday, AJ
   Hill, N
   Holbrook, NJ
   Edgar, GJ
   Stuart-Smith, R
   Barrett, N
   Wernberg, T
   Watson, RA
   Smale, DA
   Fulton, EA
   Slawinski, D
   Feng, M
   Radford, BT
   Thompson, PA
   Bates, AE
AF Sunday, Jennifer M.
   Pecl, Gretta T.
   Frusher, Stewart
   Hobday, Alistair J.
   Hill, Nicole
   Holbrook, Neil J.
   Edgar, Graham J.
   Stuart-Smith, Rick
   Barrett, Neville
   Wernberg, Thomas
   Watson, Reg A.
   Smale, Dan A.
   Fulton, Elizabeth A.
   Slawinski, Dirk
   Feng, Ming
   Radford, Ben T.
   Thompson, Peter A.
   Bates, Amanda E.
TI Species traits and climate velocity explain geographic range shifts in
   an ocean-warming hotspot
SO ECOLOGY LETTERS
DT Article
DE Benthic invertebrates; climate change; climate response; fishes;
   functional traits; invasion; range expansion; range shifts; range size
ID MARINE HERBIVOROUS FISHES; EXTINCTION RISK; ABUNDANCE; IMPACTS; ECOLOGY;
   SIZE; INVASIONS; RESPONSES; SYSTEMS; SPREAD
AB Species' ranges are shifting globally in response to climate warming, with substantial variability among taxa, even within regions. Relationships between range dynamics and intrinsic species traits may be particularly apparent in the ocean, where temperature more directly shapes species' distributions. Here, we test for a role of species traits and climate velocity in driving range extensions in the ocean-warming hotspot of southeast Australia. Climate velocity explained some variation in range shifts, however, including species traits more than doubled the variation explained. Swimming ability, omnivory and latitudinal range size all had positive relationships with range extension rate, supporting hypotheses that increased dispersal capacity and ecological generalism promote extensions. We find independent support for the hypothesis that species with narrow latitudinal ranges are limited by factors other than climate. Our findings suggest that small-ranging species are in double jeopardy, with limited ability to escape warming and greater intrinsic vulnerability to stochastic disturbances.
RI Barrett, Neville/J-7593-2014; Thompson, Peter/A-2361-2012; Hill,
   Nicole/J-7856-2014; Wernberg, Thomas/B-4172-2010; Pecl,
   Gretta/D-7267-2011; Hobday, Alistair/A-1460-2012; Fulton,
   Elizabeth/A-2871-2008; Holbrook, Neil/M-7544-2013; Feng,
   Ming/F-5411-2010
OI Barrett, Neville/0000-0002-6167-1356; Thompson,
   Peter/0000-0002-9504-5433; Hill, Nicole/0000-0001-9329-6717; Wernberg,
   Thomas/0000-0003-1185-9745; Pecl, Gretta/0000-0003-0192-4339; Hobday,
   Alistair/0000-0002-3194-8326; Fulton, Elizabeth/0000-0002-5904-7917;
   Holbrook, Neil/0000-0002-3523-6254; Feng, Ming/0000-0002-2855-7092;
   Smale, Dan/0000-0003-4157-541X; Watson, Reg/0000-0001-7201-8865; Edgar,
   Graham/0000-0003-0833-9001
TC 104
Z9 106
SN 1461-023X
EI 1461-0248
PD SEP
PY 2015
VL 18
IS 9
BP 944
EP 953
DI 10.1111/ele.12474
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000359601100008
PM 26189556
ER

PT J
AU Dezerald, O
   Cereghino, R
   Corbara, B
   Dejean, A
   Leroy, C
AF Dezerald, Olivier
   Cereghino, Regis
   Corbara, Bruno
   Dejean, Alain
   Leroy, Celine
TI Functional trait responses of aquatic macroinvertebrates to simulated
   drought in a Neotropical bromeliad ecosystem
SO FRESHWATER BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE food webs; precipitations; rainforests; resistance; resilience; tipping
   point
ID INVERTEBRATE COMMUNITIES; TROPHIC STRUCTURE; FRESH-WATER; FOOD-WEB;
   DIVERSITY; STREAM; ASSEMBLAGES; TANK; IMPACTS; ECOLOGY
AB The duration of the dry seasons in south-eastern Amazonia is expected to increase. Little is known of how freshwater assemblages respond to drought in the humid rainforests and of the extent to which they resist the absence of rainfall before the collapse of the system. We manipulated rainshelters over tank-forming bromeliads (i.e. the interlocking leaf axils of these plants form wells that collect rainwater) to simulate an exceptionally long dry period (49days, compared with a 10-year meanSD annual maximum number of 175.3days without rainfall at the study site) and then a rewetting period. By sampling weekly over 3months, we followed the dynamics of the representation of abundance-weighted traits in invertebrate assemblages in these treatment plants and in a control group. The functional structure of assemblages was drought resistant until the water volume in the bromeliad pools dropped by 90%, when there was a sudden shift in the functional trait structure due to the loss of most populations except the drought-resistant culicids. Traits related to life history, body size and preferred food showed significant responses to drought. There was a convergence in the functional traits of species surviving in dry plants, strengthening the idea that environmental filtering, rather than stochasticity, determines the functional trajectory of aquatic assemblages during drought. At the end of the dry period, samples of the detritus potentially containing drought-resistant eggs/cysts (and eventually live larvae) were taken from the dry plants and rewetted in the laboratory, allowing us to distinguish resistant species from those requiring recolonisation via subsequent oviposition by adults from elsewhere. Patches of water-filled bromeliads persisting in the area provided the most important pool of colonists, and communities returned to the pre-disturbance state within 1-2weeks of rewetting. Our results suggest that the functional trait structure of invertebrate assemblages in bromeliads could remain stable under scenarios of precipitation change that would triple the duration of current dry periods at a local scale. Future experiments should evaluate how environmental factors might alter the tipping point between resistance to drought and a collapse in ecosystem processes.
RI Leroy, Celine/I-4857-2016
OI Leroy, Celine/0000-0003-4859-8040; CORBARA, Bruno/0000-0003-4232-8234;
   Cereghino, Regis/0000-0003-3981-3159; Dejean, Alain/0000-0002-3561-2248
TC 12
Z9 14
SN 0046-5070
EI 1365-2427
PD SEP
PY 2015
VL 60
IS 9
BP 1917
EP 1929
DI 10.1111/fwb.12621
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000359779000015
ER

PT J
AU Schmera, D
   Podani, J
   Heino, J
   Eros, T
   Poff, NL
AF Schmera, Denes
   Podani, Janos
   Heino, Jani
   Eros, Tibor
   Poff, N. LeRoy
TI A proposed unified terminology of species traits in stream ecology
SO FRESHWATER SCIENCE
DT Article
DE species traits; stream ecology; macroinvertebrates; measurement scale;
   terminology
ID LIFE-HISTORY TRAITS; FRESH-WATER FISH; FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; BIOLOGICAL
   TRAITS; BENTHIC MACROINVERTEBRATES; INVERTEBRATE TRAITS; COMMUNITY
   ECOLOGY; AQUATIC INSECTS; LARGE RIVERS; PATTERNS
AB Traits-based community analyses are receiving increasing attention. However, consistent interpretation of empirical results and ecological understanding in stream ecology are limited by ambiguous terminology. Furthermore, the measurement scales used to analyze trait data, especially ordinal-scale data, are often inappropriately applied. We identify and discuss these shortcomings and offer a solution for an operative and algebraically correct treatment of traits and a unified nomenclature that facilitates direct comparison among traits-based studies. A unified terminology allows for logical translation among existing, alternative trait nomenclatures and should facilitate communication of research findings among stream ecologists and more directly connect stream traits-based research with general ecology.
RI Schmera, Denes/B-1617-2010; Heino, Jani/E-6342-2010
OI Schmera, Denes/0000-0003-1248-8413; 
TC 30
Z9 31
SN 2161-9549
EI 2161-9565
PD SEP
PY 2015
VL 34
IS 3
BP 823
EP 830
DI 10.1086/681623
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000359667700001
ER

PT J
AU Cucherousset, J
   Villeger, S
AF Cucherousset, Julien
   Villeger, Sebastien
TI Quantifying the multiple facets of isotopic diversity: New metrics for
   stable isotope ecology
SO ECOLOGICAL INDICATORS
DT Article
DE Diversity indices; Trophic diversity; Food web; Stable isotope analyses;
   Communities; Populations; Biodiversity; Bioindication
ID COMMUNITY-WIDE MEASURES; AQUATIC FOOD WEBS; FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; NICHE
   OVERLAP; TERRESTRIAL SUPPORT; TROPHIC STRUCTURE; RATIOS PROVIDE;
   HYDROGEN; PREDATOR; REVEALS
AB Stable isotope analyses have emerged as an insightful tool for ecologists, with quantitative methods being developed to analyse data at the population, community and food web levels. In parallel, functional ecologists have developed metrics to quantify the multiple facets of functional diversity in a n-dimensional space based on functional traits. Here, we transferred and adapted metrics developed by functional ecologists into a set of four isotopic diversity metrics (isotopic divergence, dispersion, evenness and uniqueness) complementary to the existing metrics. Specifically, these new metrics are mathematically independent of the number of organisms analysed and account for the abundance of organisms. They can also be calculated with more than two stable isotopes. In addition, we also provide a procedure for calculating the levels of isotopic overlap (similarity and turnover) between two groups of organisms. These metrics have been implemented into new functions in R made freely available to users and we illustrated their application using stable isotope values from a freshwater fish community. Transferring the framework developed initially for measuring functional diversity to stable isotope ecology will allow more efficient assessments of changes in the multiple facets of isotopic diversity following anthropogenic disturbances. (C) 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
RI Villeger, Sebastien/C-6272-2011
OI Villeger, Sebastien/0000-0002-2362-7178; Cucherousset,
   Julien/0000-0003-0533-9479
TC 19
Z9 20
SN 1470-160X
EI 1872-7034
PD SEP
PY 2015
VL 56
BP 152
EP 160
DI 10.1016/j.ecolind.2015.03.032
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000356743800018
ER

PT J
AU Valente, LMP
   Rema, P
   Ferraro, V
   Pintado, M
   Sousa-Pinto, I
   Cunha, LM
   Oliveira, MB
   Araujo, M
AF Valente, Luisa M. P.
   Rema, Paulo
   Ferraro, V.
   Pintado, M.
   Sousa-Pinto, Isabel
   Cunha, Luis M.
   Oliveira, M. B.
   Araujo, Mariana
TI Iodine enrichment of rainbow trout flesh by dietary supplementation with
   the red seaweed Gracilaria vermiculophylla
SO AQUACULTURE
DT Article
DE Flesh quality; IMTA-cultivated seaweed; Sensory analysis; Functional
   food
ID SPLIT-PLOT DESIGNS; ONCORHYNCHUS-MYKISS; VITAMIN-E; ANTIOXIDANT
   ACTIVITY; MARINE-ALGAE; FISH-MEAL; PHENOLIC-COMPOUNDS; ALPHA-TOCOPHEROL;
   BURSA-PASTORIS; FRESH-WATER
AB The effects of different dietary inclusion levels (0, 5 and 10%) of IMTA-cultivated Gracilaria vermiculophylla on rainbow trout growth performance and flesh quality traits were evaluated. Flesh chemical composition (moisture, protein, lipid, vitamin E and iodine contents), sensory attributes and instrumental color were determined after a feeding period of 91 days with the experimental diets. The antioxidant activity of muscle carotenoids and hydrolysates was also determined by the 2,2-azino-bis-3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic acid (ABTS) and 2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH) methods. By the end of the experiment, fish fed CTRL or G5 diet reached similar body weight (215-220 g), but fish fed G10 weighed significantly less (167 g). Seaweed inclusion increased flesh moisture and decreased lipid content, with significant differences between the G5 and CTRL groups. Vitamin E content varied among treatments with CTRL fed fish presenting the highest levels of a-tocopherol. Iodine levels in the flesh increased with the seaweed inclusion, with fish fed G5 doubling its iodine content (214.5 mu g/kg) in relation to the CTRL (111.7 mu g/kg). Instrumental color showed that cooked fillets from fish fed seaweed-rich diets were more luminous (L*), less yellowish (b*) and more reddish (a*) than the CTRL. The sensory evaluation showed that fish fed with seaweed had juicier fillets than the CTRL with G5 presenting the most intense (pinkish) color. The instrumental differences are balanced in such away that the sensory panel perceived G5 as the sample with higher color intensity. Muscle carotenoid extracts presented no significant antioxidant activity through the ABTS and DPPH assays, whereas muscle hydrolysates showed similar antioxidant activity in all dietary treatments (ca. 33% through DPPH assay).
   The inclusion of Gracilaria sp. meal in diets for rainbow trout seems to be possible for up to 5%, as higher inclusion levels resulted in significantly smaller fish. The sensory panel perceived G5 as the sample with higher color intensity and juicier than the CTRL. Moreover, flesh iodine content doubled in fish fed G5, confirming seaweed as a natural and effective tool to increase the nutritional value of rainbow trout.
   Statement of relevance/impact of your paper to the general field of commercial aquaculture
   This paper is relevant for the aquafeed industry and fish consumers. Fish meal has traditionally been the major dietary protein source for fish, but its reduction in aquafeeds is now a priority goal for the further expansion and sustainability of farmed fish production. Seaweeds may act as nutrient supply in fish, which in turn could ultimately function as vehicle of valuable compounds in human nutrition. This paper shows that 5% Gracilaria sp. meal can be a natural and effective tool to increase the nutritional value of rainbow trout flesh without impacting growth. (C) 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
RI Ferraro, Vincenza/K-8153-2014; valente, luisa/A-3769-2010; Scientific
   output, CIIMAR/E-5122-2012; Cunha, Luis/A-2103-2011; Scientific
   Productivity, CIIMAR/N-6498-2017
OI Ferraro, Vincenza/0000-0003-4815-0297; valente,
   luisa/0000-0002-2496-4854; Scientific output,
   CIIMAR/0000-0001-6270-2153; Cunha, Luis/0000-0002-4590-7533; Scientific
   Productivity, CIIMAR/0000-0002-3703-4402; Sousa Pinto,
   Isabel/0000-0002-9231-0553; Pintado, Maria Manuela/0000-0002-0760-3184;
   Oliveira, Beatriz/0000-0002-6767-6596
TC 9
Z9 9
SN 0044-8486
EI 1873-5622
PD SEP 1
PY 2015
VL 446
BP 132
EP 139
DI 10.1016/j.aquaculture.2015.05.004
SC Fisheries; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000355672000019
ER

PT J
AU Li, W
   Cheng, JM
   Yu, KL
   Epstein, HE
   Du, GZ
AF Li, Wei
   Cheng, Ji-Min
   Yu, Kai-Liang
   Epstein, Howard E.
   Du, Guo-Zhen
TI Niche and Neutral Processes Together Determine Diversity Loss in
   Response to Fertilization in an Alpine Meadow Community
SO PLOS ONE
DT Article
ID FUNCTIONAL TRAITS; TIBETAN PLATEAU; PLANT TRAITS; GRASSLAND COMMUNITIES;
   NITROGEN DEPOSITION; RELATIVE ABUNDANCE; COASTAL CALIFORNIA; SPECIES
   ABUNDANCE; FIELD EXPERIMENT; COMPETITION
AB Fertilization via nutrient deposition and agricultural inputs is one of the most important factors driving decreases in plant diversity. However, we still do not fully understand which processes (niche process or neutral process) are more important in leading to decreases in plant diversity caused by fertilization. A hypothesis-based approach was used to test the relative importance of niche versus neutral processes along a fertilization gradient in an alpine meadow community on the eastern Tibetan plateau, China. Niche overlap values were calculated for species biomass, and the null model was used to generate the values of niche overlap expected at random. A linear regression modeling was used to evaluate the relationship between functional traits (specific leaf area, leaf dry matter content, and leaf total nitrogen concentration) and species relative abundance. Our results demonstrated that observed niche overlap for species biomass was significantly higher than expected at lower fertilization gradients. Moreover, we also found a significantly negative correlation between species relative abundance and specific leaf area and leaf dry matter content, but a significantly positive correlation between relative abundance and leaf nitrogen concentration at lower fertilization gradients. However, these relationships were not significant at higher fertilization gradients. We concluded that community assembly is dynamic progression along the environmental gradients, and niche and neutral processes may together determine species diversity loss in response to fertilization.
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 1932-6203
PD AUG 17
PY 2015
VL 10
IS 8
AR e0134560
DI 10.1371/journal.pone.0134560
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000359664300008
PM 26280919
ER

PT J
AU Baptista, J
   Martinho, F
   Nyitrai, D
   Pardal, MA
   Dolbeth, M
AF Baptista, J.
   Martinho, F.
   Nyitrai, D.
   Pardal, M. A.
   Dolbeth, M.
TI Long-term functional changes in an estuarine fish assemblage
SO MARINE POLLUTION BULLETIN
DT Article
DE Fish assemblages; Estuaries; Traits; Hydrology; Climate change
ID SUBTIDAL BENTHIC COMMUNITIES; CLIMATE-CHANGE; TEMPERATE ESTUARY; MONDEGO
   ESTUARY; WATER-QUALITY; FISHERIES MANAGEMENT; PORTUGUESE COAST; MARINE
   NURSERIES; DROUGHT; DIVERSITY
AB The functional diversity of the fish assemblages of the Mondego estuary was studied for a discontinuous 30-year period (1988-2012). During this time, hydrological changes occurred due to man-induced alterations and weather extremes. These changes led to alterations in the structure and function of the fish community. Species richness and functional richness decreased over time and the fish community started to explore new micro-habitats and food resources. Before severe hydrological changes, the community was dominated by pelagic, detritivorous and species with wider salinity ranges. After, the community became dominated by demersal, benthic, piscivorous and marine species. During a drought, omnivorous became increasingly important, reflecting greater possibilities of using available feeding resources. We have also found an increase in sub-tropical species throughout the years, which might be related to gradual temperature increases at a global scale. This study also confirmed estuaries as extremely important for restocking several commercial species. (C) 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
RI CESAM, UA/M-3762-2015; Pardal, Miguel Angelo/C-3984-2009; Dolbeth,
   Marina/I-3840-2013
OI Pardal, Miguel Angelo/0000-0001-6048-7007; Dolbeth,
   Marina/0000-0002-8775-0351; Martinho, Filipe/0000-0001-8358-8329
TC 10
Z9 11
SN 0025-326X
EI 1879-3363
PD AUG 15
PY 2015
VL 97
IS 1-2
BP 125
EP 134
DI 10.1016/j.marpolbul.2015.06.025
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000360417800025
PM 26093816
ER

PT J
AU Kanaya, G
   Suzuki, T
   Kikuchi, E
AF Kanaya, Gen
   Suzuki, Takao
   Kikuchi, Eisuke
TI Impacts of the 2011 Tsunami on Sediment Characteristics and
   Macrozoobenthic Assemblages in a Shallow Eutrophic Lagoon, Sendai Bay,
   Japan
SO PLOS ONE
DT Article
ID ORGANIC ENRICHMENT; MARINE-SEDIMENTS; GAMO LAGOON; GRAIN-SIZE;
   COMMUNITIES; RECOVERY; RECOLONIZATION; EARTHQUAKE; ABUNDANCE
AB A huge tsunami is one of the greatest disturbance events in coastal benthic communities, although the ecological consequences are not fully understood. Here we examined the tsunami-induced changes in the sediment environment and macrozoobenthic assemblage in a eutrophic brackish lagoon in eastern Japan. The 7.2-m-high tsunami completely replaced muddy sediment with drifting sea sand throughout the lagoon, leading to the drastic changes in quantity and quality of sedimental organic matters, sulfide contents, and sediment redox condition. Intensive physical stress devastated the benthic community, but the disappearance of sulfidic muddy bottoms significantly improved the habitat quality for macrozoobenthos. The re-established macrozoobenthic community after 5 months was characterized by (1) a 2-fold higher total density, but sharp declines in species richness, diversity, and evenness; (2) an increased density of opportunistic taxa (e.g., polychaete Pseudopolydora spp. and amphipod Monocorophium uenoi) in newly created sandy bottoms; and (3) disappearance of several dominant taxa including bivalves and chironomid larvae. These findings indicate that the sensitivity and recovery potential of macrozoobenthos were highly taxa-specific, which was closely related to the taxa's ecological characteristics, including tolerance to physical disturbance, life-history traits, and life form. Our data revealed the rapid recolonization of opportunistic macrozoobenthos after a huge tsunami, which would contribute to the functional recovery of estuarine soft-bottom habitats shortly after a disturbance event.
TC 23
Z9 24
SN 1932-6203
PD AUG 4
PY 2015
VL 10
IS 8
AR e0135125
DI 10.1371/journal.pone.0135125
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000358942700097
PM 26241654
ER

PT J
AU Zhao, Y
   Wang, Y
   Quigg, A
AF Zhao, Yan
   Wang, You
   Quigg, Antonietta
TI THE 24 HOUR RECOVERY KINETICS FROM N STARVATION IN PHAEODACTYLUM
   TRICORNUTUM AND EMILIANIA HUXLEYI
SO JOURNAL OF PHYCOLOGY
DT Article
DE cellular recovery; chl fluorescence; coccolithophore; diatom; Emiliania
   huxleyi; models; nitrogen limitation; Phaeodactylum tricornutum;
   photosynthesis
ID GULF-OF-MEXICO; NITROGEN STARVATION; PHOTOSYNTHETIC APPARATUS;
   PHOSPHORUS LIMITATION; NUTRIENT LIMITATION; MARINE MICROALGAE;
   PROTEIN-TURNOVER; RESPONSES; ALGAE; NITRATE
AB The response of N (nitrate) starved cells of the diatom Phaeodactylum tricornutum and the coccolithophore Emiliania huxleyi to a pulse of new N were measured to investigate rapid cellular and photosynthetic recovery kinetics. The changes of multiple parameters were followed over 24 h. In P. tricornutum, the recovery of F-v/F-m (the maximum quantum yield of PS II) and rPSII (the functional absorption cross-section for PSII) started within the first hour, much earlier than other parameters. Cellular pigments did not recover during the 24 h but the chlorophyll (chl) a/carotenoid ratios increased to levels measured in the controls. Cell division was independent of the recovery of chl a. In E. huxleyi, the recovery of F-v/F-m and rPSII started after an hour, synchronous with the increase in cellular organic N and chl a with pigments fully recovered within 14 h. P. tricornutum prioritized the recovery of its photosynthetic functions and cell divisions while E. huxleyi did not follow this pattern. We hypothesize that the different recovery strategies between the two species allow P. tricornutum to be more competitive when N pulses are introduced into N-limited water while E. huxleyi is adapted to N scarce waters where such pulses are infrequent. These findings are consistent with successional patterns observed in coastal environments. This is one of only a few studies exploring recovery kinetics of cellular functions and photosynthesis after nitrogen stress in phytoplankton. Our results can be used to enhance ecological models linking phytoplankton traits to species diversity and community structure.
TC 5
Z9 5
SN 0022-3646
EI 1529-8817
PD AUG
PY 2015
VL 51
IS 4
BP 726
EP 738
DI 10.1111/jpy.12314
SC Plant Sciences; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000359918800012
PM 26986793
ER

PT J
AU Eklof, JS
   Havenhand, JN
   Alsterberg, C
   Gamfeldt, L
AF Eklof, Johan S.
   Havenhand, Jonathan N.
   Alsterberg, Christian
   Gamfeldt, Lars
TI Community-level effects of rapid experimental warming and consumer loss
   outweigh effects of rapid ocean acidification
SO OIKOS
DT Article
ID CLIMATE-CHANGE; COASTAL ECOSYSTEMS; FUNCTIONAL TRAITS; PRIMARY
   PRODUCERS; GLOBAL PATTERNS; IMPACTS; BIODIVERSITY; ECOLOGY; TEMPERATURE;
   RESPONSES
AB Climate change and consumer loss simultaneously affect marine ecosystems, but we have limited understanding of the relative importance of these factors and the interactions between them. Moreover, effects of environmental change are mediated by organism traits or life histories, which determine their sensitivity. Yet, trait-based analyses have rarely been used to understand the effects of climate change, especially in the marine environment. Here we used a five-week mesocosm experiment to assess the single and interactive effects of 1) rapid ocean warming, 2) rapid ocean acidification, and 3) simulated consumer loss, on the diversity and composition of macrofauna communities in eelgrass Zostera marina beds. Experimental warming (ambient versus + 3.2 degrees C) and loss of a key consumer (the omnivorous crustacean, Gammarus locusta) both increased macrofauna richness and abundance, and altered overall species trait distributions and life history composition. Warming and consumer-loss favored poorly defended epifaunal crustaceans (tube-building amphipods), and species that brood their off spring. We suggest these organisms were favored because warming and consumer-loss caused increased metabolism, food supply and, potentially, settling substrate, and lowered predation pressure from the omnivorous G. locusta. Importantly, we found no single, or interactive, effects of the rapid ocean acidification (ambient versus -0.35 pH units). We suggest this result reflects natural variability in the native habitat and, potentially, the short duration of the experiment: organisms in these communities routinely experience rapid diurnal pH fluctuations that exceed the mean ocean acidification predicted for the coming century (and used in our experiments). In summary, our study indicates that macrofauna in shallow vegetated ecosystems will be significantly more affected by rapid warming and consumer diversity loss than by rapid ocean acidification.
RI Eklof, Johan/C-7722-2017
OI Eklof, Johan/0000-0001-6936-0926; Havenhand,
   Jonathan/0000-0001-6721-7763
TC 8
Z9 8
SN 0030-1299
EI 1600-0706
PD AUG
PY 2015
VL 124
IS 8
BP 1040
EP 1049
DI 10.1111/oik.01544
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000359058600008
ER

PT J
AU Holker, F
   Vanni, MJ
   Kuiper, JJ
   Meile, C
   Grossart, HP
   Stief, P
   Adrian, R
   Lorke, A
   Dellwig, O
   Brand, A
   Hupfer, M
   Mooij, WM
   Nutzmann, G
   Lewandowski, J
AF Hoelker, Franz
   Vanni, Michael J.
   Kuiper, Jan J.
   Meile, Christof
   Grossart, Hans-Peter
   Stief, Peter
   Adrian, Rita
   Lorke, Andreas
   Dellwig, Olaf
   Brand, Andreas
   Hupfer, Michael
   Mooij, Wolf M.
   Nuetzmann, Gunnar
   Lewandowski, Joerg
TI Tube-dwelling invertebrates: tiny ecosystem engineers have large effects
   in lake ecosystems
SO ECOLOGICAL MONOGRAPHS
DT Article
DE biogeochemistry; chironomids; ecosystem modelling; filter-feeding; food
   web; nutrient cycling; tube-dwelling macrozoobenthos
ID CHIRONOMUS-PLUMOSUS LARVAE; METHANE-OXIDIZING BACTERIA; FRESH-WATER
   ECOSYSTEMS; NITROUS-OXIDE EMISSION; LONG-TERM RESPONSE;
   MARINE-SEDIMENTS; ORGANIC-MATTER; EUTROPHIC LAKE; SHALLOW LAKES;
   DREISSENA-POLYMORPHA
AB There is ample evidence that tube-dwelling invertebrates such as chironomids significantly alter multiple important ecosystem functions, particularly in shallow lakes. Chironomids pump large water volumes, and associated suspended and dissolved substances, through the sediment and thereby compete with pelagic filter feeders for particulate organic matter. This can exert a high grazing pressure on phytoplankton, microorganisms, and perhaps small zooplankton and thus strengthen benthic-pelagic coupling. Furthermore, intermittent pumping by tube-dwelling invertebrates oxygenates sediments and creates a dynamic, three-dimensional mosaic of redox conditions. This shapes microbial community composition and spatial distribution, and alters microbe-mediated biogeochemical functions, which often depend on redox potential. As a result, extended hotspots of element cycling occur at the oxic-anoxic interfaces, controlling the fate of organic matter and nutrients as well as fluxes of nutrients between sediments and water. Surprisingly, the mechanisms and magnitude of interactions mediated by these organisms are still poorly understood. To provide a synthesis of the importance of tube-dwelling invertebrates, we review existing research and integrate previously disregarded functional traits into an ecosystem model. Based on existing research and our models, we conclude that tube-dwelling invertebrates play a central role in controlling water column nutrient pools, and hence water quality and trophic state. Furthermore, these tiny ecosystem engineers can influence the thresholds that determine shifts between alternate clear and turbid states of shallow lakes. The large effects stand in contrast to the conventional limnological paradigm emphasizing predominantly pelagic food webs. Given the vast number of shallow lakes worldwide, benthic invertebrates are likely to be relevant drivers of biogeochemical processes at regional and global scales, thereby mediating feedback mechanisms linked to climate change.
RI Lorke, Andreas/B-9195-2008; Mooij, Wolf/C-2677-2008; Lewandowski,
   Jorg/E-9028-2012; Library, Library/A-4320-2012; Stief,
   Peter/C-1090-2017; Holker, Franz/A-5683-2009
OI Lorke, Andreas/0000-0001-5533-1817; Mooij, Wolf/0000-0001-5586-8200;
   Lewandowski, Jorg/0000-0001-5278-129X; Library,
   Library/0000-0002-3835-159X; Stief, Peter/0000-0002-6355-150X; Holker,
   Franz/0000-0001-5932-266X; Kuiper, Jan J./0000-0002-6655-9355; Brand,
   Andreas/0000-0002-3046-037X; Meile, Christof/0000-0002-0825-4596
TC 37
Z9 38
SN 0012-9615
EI 1557-7015
PD AUG
PY 2015
VL 85
IS 3
BP 333
EP 351
DI 10.1890/014-1160.1
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000358731100002
ER

PT J
AU Zwart, JA
   Solomon, CT
   Jones, SE
AF Zwart, Jacob A.
   Solomon, Christopher T.
   Jones, Stuart E.
TI Phytoplankton traits predict ecosystem function in a global set of lakes
SO ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE ecosystem function; GLEON; gross primary productivity; lake primary
   production; phytoplankton traits; trait-based ecology; US EPA National
   Lake Assessment
ID PHOSPHORUS LIMITATION; COMMUNITY ECOLOGY; LIGHT; METABOLISM; CLIMATE;
   CARBON; PHOTOSYNTHESIS; PRODUCTIVITY; BIODIVERSITY; RESPONSES
AB Predicting ecosystem function from environmental conditions is a central goal of ecosystem ecology. However, many traditional ecosystem models are tailored for specific regions or ecosystem types, requiring several regional models to predict the same function. Alternatively, trait-based approaches have been effectively used to predict community structure in both terrestrial and aquatic environments and ecosystem function in a limited number of terrestrial examples. Here, we test the efficacy of a trait-based model in predicting gross primary production (GPP) in lake ecosystems. We incorporated data from >1000 United States lakes along with laboratory-generated phytoplankton trait data to build a trait-based model of GPP and then validated the model with GPP observations from a separate set of globally distributed lakes. The trait-based model performed as well as or outperformed two ecosystem models both spatially and temporally, demonstrating the efficacy of trait-based models for predicting ecosystem function over a range of environmental conditions.
RI Solomon, Chris/E-6284-2014
OI Solomon, Chris/0000-0002-2850-4257
TC 15
Z9 15
SN 0012-9658
EI 1939-9170
PD AUG
PY 2015
VL 96
IS 8
BP 2257
EP 2264
DI 10.1890/14-2102.1
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000358454500023
PM 26405750
ER

PT J
AU Coleman, MA
   Bates, AE
   Stuart-Smith, RD
   Malcolm, HA
   Harasti, D
   Jordan, A
   Knott, NA
   Edgar, GJ
   Kelaher, BP
AF Coleman, M. A.
   Bates, A. E.
   Stuart-Smith, R. D.
   Malcolm, H. A.
   Harasti, D.
   Jordan, A.
   Knott, N. A.
   Edgar, G. J.
   Kelaher, B. P.
TI Functional traits reveal early responses in marine reserves following
   protection from fishing
SO DIVERSITY AND DISTRIBUTIONS
DT Article
DE Conservation; effectiveness; fish; marine reserve; protected areas
ID GREAT-BARRIER-REEF; UNDERWATER VIDEO; AREAS; FISHES; OBJECTIVES;
   FEATURES
AB AimEvaluating the effectiveness of marine reserves in achieving conservation goals is challenged by the decadal scales over which biological systems respond following protection. Given that trophic interactions underpin community responses following protection and that complex ecological interactions make responses difficult to identify, quantifying changes in species traits may provide detail missed by traditional diversity measures, including information relevant to ecosystem functioning. We determine whether this is the case by comparing community metrics based on functional traits to taxonomic diversity measures associated with no take' marine reserves and partially protected, fished areas along eight degrees of latitude.
   LocationEighteen no take' marine reserves and 14 partially protected, fished areas along the east coast of Australia.
   MethodWe use two independent datasets from shallow and deep coastal rocky reefs to analyse trait-based metrics and taxonomic diversity from sites inside reserves to sites in partially protected, fished areas.
   ResultsTaxonomic diversity (species diversity and richness) and trait-based multimetrics (functional richness and dispersion) showed no difference with level of protection. Total fish abundance responded positively to protection, but only on shallow reefs. Comparing values of individual functional traits implied a return of larger bodied species of fish in protected areas and an increase in trophic level. The latter was significant on deeper reefs and was strongly correlated with age of protected area. Thus, recovery responses were largely associated with community mean functional trait values, highlighting the value of trait-based approaches for detecting change, when no differences in traditional taxonomic diversity measures were apparent.
   Main conclusionsWe empirically demonstrate that functional traits can elucidate early conservation outcomes, when traditional multimetric diversity indices do not distinguish protected and fished communities. Ecologically relevant but sensitive metrics are fundamental to allow information to be incorporated into adaptive management strategies, which often occur on political rather than biological time-scales.
RI Coleman, Melinda A/R-5563-2016; Kelaher, Brendan/P-3647-2017
OI Coleman, Melinda A/0000-0003-2623-633X; Kelaher,
   Brendan/0000-0002-7505-4412; Edgar, Graham/0000-0003-0833-9001
TC 12
Z9 12
SN 1366-9516
EI 1472-4642
PD AUG
PY 2015
VL 21
IS 8
BP 876
EP 887
DI 10.1111/ddi.12309
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000358370900003
ER

PT J
AU Nguyen, D
   Maranger, R
   Balague, V
   Coll-Llado, M
   Lovejoy, C
   Pedros-Alio, C
AF Dan Nguyen
   Maranger, Roxane
   Balague, Vanessa
   Coll-Llado, Montserrat
   Lovejoy, Connie
   Pedros-Alio, Carlos
TI Winter diversity and expression of proteorhodopsin genes in a polar
   ocean
SO ISME JOURNAL
DT Article
ID RIBOSOMAL-RNA GENES; FRESH-WATER; BACTERIAL COMMUNITIES; ACTINORHODOPSIN
   GENES; MARINE FLAVOBACTERIA; ARCTIC-OCEAN; LIGHT; ACTINOBACTERIA; SAR11;
   SEA
AB Mixotrophy is a valuable functional trait used by microbes when environmental conditions vary broadly or resources are limited. In the sunlit waters of the ocean, photoheterotrophy, a form of mixotrophy, is often mediated by proteorhodopsin (PR), a seven helices transmembrane protein binding the retinal chromophore. Altogether, they allow bacteria to capture photic energy for sensory and proton gradient formation cell functions. The seasonal occurrence and diversity of the gene coding for PR in cold oligotrophic polar oceans is not known and PR expression has not yet been reported. Here we show that PR is widely distributed among bacterial taxa, and that PR expression decreased markedly during the winter months in the Arctic Ocean. Gammaproteobacteria-like PR sequences were always dominant. However, within the second most common affiliation, there was a transition from Flavobacteria-like PR in early winter to Alphaproteobacteria-like PR in late winter. The phylogenetic shifts followed carbon dynamics, where patterns in expression were consistent with community succession, as identified by DNA community fingerprinting. Although genes for PR were always present, the trend in decreasing transcripts from January to February suggested reduced functional utility of PR during winter. Under winter darkness, sustained expression suggests that PR may continue to be useful for non-ATP forming functions, such as environmental sensing or small solute transport. The persistence of PR expression in winter among some bacterial groups may offer a competitive advantage, where its multifunctionality enhances microbial survival under harsh polar conditions.
RI Lovejoy, Connie/A-3756-2008; Pedros-Alio, Carlos/H-1222-2011
OI Lovejoy, Connie/0000-0001-8027-2281; Pedros-Alio,
   Carlos/0000-0003-1009-4277; Maranger, Roxane/0000-0002-2509-4678
TC 13
Z9 13
SN 1751-7362
EI 1751-7370
PD AUG
PY 2015
VL 9
IS 8
BP 1835
EP 1845
DI 10.1038/ismej.2015.1
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Microbiology
UT WOS:000358260100013
PM 25700336
ER

PT J
AU Van Oostende, N
   Dunne, JP
   Fawcett, SE
   Ward, BB
AF Van Oostende, N.
   Dunne, J. P.
   Fawcett, S. E.
   Ward, B. B.
TI Phytoplankton succession explains size-partitioning of new production
   following upwelling-induced blooms
SO JOURNAL OF MARINE SYSTEMS
DT Article
DE Phytoplankton; Cell size; Community succession; New production; Coastal
   upwelling; Nitrate uptake; Biogeochemical model
ID MARINE-PHYTOPLANKTON; NUTRIENT-UPTAKE; NITRATE UPTAKE;
   SKELETONEMA-COSTATUM; CELL-SIZE; PHYSIOLOGICAL-RESPONSES; MICROBIAL
   COMMUNITIES; CALIFORNIA CURRENT; GROWTH-RATES; TRADE-OFFS
AB Large and chain-forming diatoms typically dominate the phytoplankton biomass after initiation of coastal upwelling. The ability of these diatoms to accelerate and maintain elevated nitrate uptake rates has been proposed to explain the dominance of diatoms over all other phytoplankton groups. Moreover, the observed delay in biomass accumulation following nitrate supply after initiation of upwelling events has been hypothesised to result from changes in the diatom community structure or from physiological acclimation. To investigate these mechanisms, we used both numerical modelling and experimental incubations that reproduced the characteristic succession from small to large species in phytoplankton community composition and size structure. Using the Tracers Of Phytoplankton with Allometric Zooplankton (TOPAZ) ecosystem model as a framework, we find that variations in functional group-specific traits must be taken into account, through adjustments of group-dependent maximum production rates (P-Cmax, s(-1)), in order to accurately reproduce the observed patterns and timescales of size-partitioned new production in a non-steady state environment. Representation of neither nutrient acclimation, nor diatom diversity in the model was necessary as long as lower than theoretical maximum production rates were implemented. We conclude that this physiological feature, PCmax, is critical in representing the early, relatively higher specific nitrate uptake rate of large diatoms, and explains the differential success of small and large phytoplankton communities in response to nitrate supply during upwelling. (C) 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
RI Dunne, John/F-8086-2012
OI Dunne, John/0000-0002-8794-0489; Van Oostende,
   Nicolas/0000-0002-1953-7209
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 0924-7963
EI 1879-1573
PD AUG
PY 2015
VL 148
BP 14
EP 25
DI 10.1016/j.jmarsys.2015.01.009
SC Geology; Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000356546400002
ER

PT J
AU Corrales, X
   Coll, M
   Tecchio, S
   Bellido, JM
   Fernandez, AM
   Palomera, I
AF Corrales, Xavier
   Coll, Marta
   Tecchio, Samuele
   Maria Bellido, Jose
   Mario Fernandez, Angel
   Palomera, Isabel
TI Ecosystem structure and fishing impacts in the northwestern
   Mediterranean Sea using a food web model within a comparative approach
SO JOURNAL OF MARINE SYSTEMS
DT Article
DE Northwestern Mediterranean Sea; Ecopath model; Mass-balance model;
   Fishing impacts; Ecosystem Approach to Fisheries; Comparative approach
ID SOUTH CATALAN SEA; ENGRAULIS-ENCRASICOLUS; EUROPEAN ANCHOVY; TROPHIC
   FLOWS; EXPLOITED ECOSYSTEMS; HABITAT SUITABILITY; UPWELLING SYSTEMS;
   FISHERIES; MANAGEMENT; GULF
AB We developed an ecological model to characterize the structure and functioning of the marine continental shelf and slope area of the northwestern Mediterranean Sea, from Toulon to Cape La Nao (NWM model), in the early 2000s. The model included previously modeled areas in the NW Mediterranean (the Gulf of Lions and the Southern Catalan Sea) and expanded their ranges, covering 45,547 km(2), with depths from 0 to 1000 in. The study area was chosen to specifically account for the connectivity between the areas and shared fish stocks and fleets.
   Input data were based on local scientific surveys and fishing statistics, published data on stomach content analyses, and the application of empirical equations to estimate consumption and production rates. The model was composed of 54 functional groups, from primary producers to top predators, and Spanish and French fishing fleets were considered. Results were analyzed using ecological indicators and compared with outputs from ecosystem models developed in the Mediterranean Sea and the Gulf of Cadiz prior to this study.
   Results showed that the main trophic flows were associated with detritus, phytoplankton, zooplankton and benthic invertebrates. Several high trophic level organisms (such as dolphins, benthopelagic cephalopods, large demersal fishes from the continental shelf, and other large pelagic fishes), and the herbivorous salema fish, were identified as keystone groups within the ecosystem. Results confirmed that fishing impact was high and widespread throughout the food web. The comparative approach highlighted that, despite productivity differences, the ecosystems shared common features in structure and functioning traits such as the important role of detritus, the dominance of the pelagic fraction in terms of flows and the importance of benthic pelagic coupling. (C) 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
RI Palomera, Isabel/L-4769-2014; Albo Puigserver, Marta/F-5693-2016
OI Palomera, Isabel/0000-0001-5708-168X; Albo Puigserver,
   Marta/0000-0002-0477-5984
TC 17
Z9 17
SN 0924-7963
EI 1879-1573
PD AUG
PY 2015
VL 148
BP 183
EP 199
DI 10.1016/j.jmarsys.2015.03.006
SC Geology; Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000356546400016
ER

PT J
AU Tchakonte, S
   Ajeagah, GA
   Camara, AI
   Diomande, D
   Tchatcho, NLN
   Ngassam, P
AF Tchakonte, Simeon
   Ajeagah, Gideon A.
   Camara, Adama Idrissa
   Diomande, Dramane
   Tchatcho, Nectaire Lie Nyamsi
   Ngassam, Pierre
TI Impact of urbanization on aquatic insect assemblages in the coastal zone
   of Cameroon: the use of biotraits and indicator taxa to assess
   environmental pollution
SO HYDROBIOLOGIA
DT Article
DE Urbanization; Water pollution; Aquatic insect community structure;
   Biological traits; Indicator taxa
ID LAND-USE; MACROINVERTEBRATE COMMUNITIES; BENTHIC MACROINVERTEBRATES;
   NEOTROPICAL STREAMS; MULTIPLE STRESSORS; BIOLOGICAL TRAITS;
   SEASONAL-CHANGES; URBAN; STORMWATER; LANDSCAPES
AB Internationally, waterways within urban area are subject to broad-scale environmental pollution. In this study, we used in-stream aquatic insects as surrogates to measure the aquatic health of urban streams in the Douala township. We compared these assessments with samples collected from a suburb stream. Aquatic insects were sampled monthly over a 13-month period in ten urban sites and two forest sites. Measurements of the environmental variables were done simultaneously. Results revealed that urban streams are highly polluted and ecologically impaired. The classification of samples by the self-organized mapping analysis permitted to clearly separate urban and non-urban aquatic insect assemblages. Higher total taxa richness, higher values of diversity indices, and higher Ephemeroptera-Plecoptera-Trichoptera (EPT) scores were recorded in forest sites. Inversely, in urban streams, very low taxa richness was observed, with the proliferation of dipterans, and the absence of EPT taxa. The EPT, coleoptera, and hemiptera taxa, the functional feeding groups of shredders and predators, and the insect taxa relying on gills and plastron for breathing were good predictors of anthropogenic pollution. Indicator taxa and ecological functioning traits identified in this study could enhance the accuracy of water quality assessment methodologies and potentially enable predictive models for evaluating the human impact in stream ecosystems.
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 0018-8158
EI 1573-5117
PD AUG
PY 2015
VL 755
IS 1
BP 123
EP 144
DI 10.1007/s10750-015-2221-5
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000356039300009
ER

PT J
AU Jennings, S
   Collingridge, K
AF Jennings, Simon
   Collingridge, Kate
TI Predicting Consumer Biomass, Size-Structure, Production, Catch
   Potential, Responses to Fishing and Associated Uncertainties in the
   World's Marine Ecosystems
SO PLOS ONE
DT Article
ID FOOD WEBS; CLIMATE-CHANGE; SPECIES ABUNDANCE; ENERGY-FLOW; BODY-SIZE;
   FISHERIES; MODEL; COMMUNITY; SPECTRUM; OCEAN
AB Existing estimates of fish and consumer biomass in the world's oceans are disparate. This creates uncertainty about the roles of fish and other consumers in biogeochemical cycles and ecosystem processes, the extent of human and environmental impacts and fishery potential. We develop and use a size-based macroecological model to assess the effects of parameter uncertainty on predicted consumer biomass, production and distribution. Resulting uncertainty is large (e.g. median global biomass 4.9 billion tonnes for consumers weighing 1 g to 1000 kg; 50% uncertainty intervals of 2 to 10.4 billion tonnes; 90% uncertainty intervals of 0.3 to 26.1 billion tonnes) and driven primarily by uncertainty in trophic transfer efficiency and its relationship with predator-prey body mass ratios. Even the upper uncertainty intervals for global predictions of consumer biomass demonstrate the remarkable scarcity of marine consumers, with less than one part in 30 million by volume of the global oceans comprising tissue of macroscopic animals. Thus the apparently high densities of marine life seen in surface and coastal waters and frequently visited abundance hotspots will likely give many in society a false impression of the abundance of marine animals. Unexploited baseline biomass predictions from the simple macroecological model were used to calibrate a more complex size-and trait-based model to estimate fisheries yield and impacts. Yields are highly dependent on baseline biomass and fisheries selectivity. Predicted global sustainable fisheries yield increases approximate to 4 fold when smaller individuals (< 20 cm from species of maximum mass < 1kg) are targeted in all oceans, but the predicted yields would rarely be accessible in practice and this fishing strategy leads to the collapse of larger species if fishing mortality rates on different size classes cannot be decoupled. Our analyses show that models with minimal parameter demands that are based on a few established ecological principles can support equitable analysis and comparison of diverse ecosystems. The analyses provide insights into the effects of parameter uncertainty on global biomass and production estimates, which have yet to be achieved with complex models, and will therefore help to highlight priorities for future research and data collection. However, the focus on simple model structures and global processes means that non-phytoplankton primary production and several groups, structures and processes of ecological and conservation interest are not represented. Consequently, our simple models become increasingly less useful than more complex alternatives when addressing questions about food web structure and function, biodiversity, resilience and human impacts at smaller scales and for areas closer to coasts.
RI Jennings, Simon/F-5085-2012
OI Jennings, Simon/0000-0002-2390-7225
TC 23
Z9 23
SN 1932-6203
PD JUL 30
PY 2015
VL 10
IS 7
AR e0133794
DI 10.1371/journal.pone.0133794
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000358837700037
PM 26226590
ER

PT J
AU Fleming, NEC
   Harrod, C
   Newton, J
   Houghton, JDR
AF Fleming, Nicholas E. C.
   Harrod, Chris
   Newton, Jason
   Houghton, Jonathan D. R.
TI Not all jellyfish are equal: isotopic evidence for inter- and
   intraspecific variation in jellyfish trophic ecology
SO PEERJ
DT Article
DE Scyphozoan jellyfish; Food web; Aurelia aurita; Cyanea lamarckii; Cyanea
   capillata; Niche width; Bayesian statistics
ID TEMPERATE COASTAL ENVIRONMENT; SCYPHOMEDUSA AURELIA-AURITA;
   CYANEA-CAPILLATA L.; GELATINOUS ZOOPLANKTON; STABLE-ISOTOPES; FOOD-WEB;
   PELAGIA-NOCTILUCA; PREY SELECTIVITY; CHESAPEAKE BAY; NICHE WIDTH
AB Jellyfish are highly topical within studies of pelagic food-webs and there is a growing realisation that their role is more complex than once thought. Efforts being made to include jellyfish within fisheries and ecosystem models are an important step forward, but our present understanding of their underlying trophic ecology can lead to their oversimplification in these models. Gelatinous zooplankton represent a polyphyletic assemblage spanning >2,000 species that inhabit coastal seas to the deep-ocean and employ a wide variety of foraging strategies. Despite this diversity, many contemporary modelling approaches include jellyfish as a single functional group feeding at one or two trophic levels at most. Recent reviews have drawn attention to this issue and highlighted the need for improved communication between biologists and theoreticians if this problem is to be overcome. We used stable isotopes to investigate the trophic ecology of three co-occurring scyphozoan jellyfish species (Aurelia aurita, Cyanea lamarckii and C. capillata) within a temperate, coastal food-web in the NE Atlantic. Using information on individual size, time of year and ;delta C-13 and delta N-15 stable isotope values, we examined: (1) whether all jellyfish could be considered as a single functional group, or showed distinct inter-specific differences in trophic ecology; (2) Were size-based shifts in trophic position, found previously in A. aurita, a common trait across species?; (3) When considered collectively, did the trophic position of three sympatric species remain constant over time? Differences in delta N-15 (trophic position) were evident between all three species, with size-based and temporal shifts in delta N-15 apparent in A. aurita and C. capillata. The isotopic niche width for all species combined increased throughout the season, reflecting temporal shifts in trophic position and seasonal succession in these gelatinous species. Taken together, these findings support previous assertions that jellyfish require more robust inclusion in marine fisheries or ecosystem models.
RI Harrod, Chris/A-8830-2008; Newton, Jason/A-9536-2009
OI Harrod, Chris/0000-0002-5353-1556; Newton, Jason/0000-0001-7594-3693
TC 22
Z9 22
SN 2167-8359
PD JUL 21
PY 2015
VL 3
AR e1110
DI 10.7717/peerj.1110
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000358692100006
PM 26244116
ER

PT J
AU Brooks, L
   Melsom, F
   Glette, T
AF Brooks, Lucy
   Melsom, Fredrik
   Glette, Tormod
TI Biological effects of long term fine limestone tailings discharge in a
   fjord ecosystem
SO MARINE POLLUTION BULLETIN
DT Article
DE Biological Traits Analysis; Marine benthic fauna; Fraenfjord; Norway;
   Mine tailings
ID MARINE; IMPACT; WASTE; DISTURBANCE; COMMUNITY; POLLUTION; CHEMISTRY;
   TRAITS; BAY
AB Benthic infaunal data collected from 1993 to 2010 were analysed to examine the effect of long term discharge of fine limestone tailings on macrofaunal species assemblages in a fjord. Relative distance from the outfall and proportion of fine tailings in the sediment were correlated with benthic community structure. Diversity decreased with increasing proportion of fine tailings. Biological Traits Analysis (BTA) was used to explore the temporal and spatial effects of the tailings gradient on macrofaunal functional attributes. BTA revealed that all stations along a pressure gradient of fine limestone tailings were dominated by free-living species. As the proportion of fine tailings in the sediment increased, there was an increase in fauna that were smaller, highly mobile, living on or nearer the surface sediment, with shorter lifespans. There was a decrease in permanent tube dwellers, those fauna with low or no mobility, that live deeper in the sediment and have longer lifespans (>5 yrs). (C) 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 0025-326X
EI 1879-3363
PD JUL 15
PY 2015
VL 96
IS 1-2
BP 321
EP 336
DI 10.1016/j.marpolbul.2015.04.052
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000357348900046
PM 25960275
ER

PT J
AU Fu, H
   Zhong, JY
   Yuan, GX
   Guo, CJ
   Lou, Q
   Zhang, W
   Xu, J
   Ni, LY
   Xie, P
   Cao, T
AF Fu, Hui
   Zhong, Jiayou
   Yuan, Guixiang
   Guo, Chunjing
   Lou, Qian
   Zhang, Wei
   Xu, Jun
   Ni, Leyi
   Xie, Ping
   Cao, Te
TI Predicting Changes in Macrophyte Community Structure from Functional
   Traits in a Freshwater Lake: A Test of Maximum Entropy Model
SO PLOS ONE
DT Article
ID AQUATIC MACROPHYTES; ECOSYSTEM PROCESSES; COASTAL CALIFORNIA; PLASTIC
   RESPONSES; DEPTH GRADIENT; PLANT TRAITS; DIVERSITY; ECOLOGY; NUTRIENTS;
   ZONATION
AB Trait-based approaches have been widely applied to investigate how community dynamics respond to environmental gradients. In this study, we applied a series of maximum entropy (maxent) models incorporating functional traits to unravel the processes governing macro-phyte community structure along water depth gradient in a freshwater lake. We sampled 42 plots and 1513 individual plants, and measured 16 functional traits and abundance of 17 macrophyte species. Study results showed that maxent model can be highly robust (99.8%) in predicting the species relative abundance of macrophytes with observed community-weighted mean (CWM) traits as the constraints, while relative low (about 30%) with CWM traits fitted from water depth gradient as the constraints. The measured traits showed notably distinct importance in predicting species abundances, with lowest for perennial growth form and highest for leaf dry mass content. For tuber and leaf nitrogen content, there were significant shifts in their effects on species relative abundance from positive in shallow water to negative in deep water. This result suggests that macrophyte species with tuber organ and greater leaf nitrogen content would become more abundant in shallow water, but would become less abundant in deep water. Our study highlights how functional traits distributed across gradients provide a robust path towards predictive community ecology.
TC 6
Z9 7
SN 1932-6203
PD JUL 13
PY 2015
VL 10
IS 7
AR e0131630
DI 10.1371/journal.pone.0131630
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000358193100011
PM 26167856
ER

PT J
AU Pomerleau, C
   Sastri, AR
   Beisner, BE
AF Pomerleau, Corinne
   Sastri, Akash R.
   Beisner, Beatrix E.
TI Evaluation of functional trait diversity for marine zooplankton
   communities in the Northeast subarctic Pacific Ocean
SO JOURNAL OF PLANKTON RESEARCH
DT Article
DE biodiversity; classification; functional diversity; functional trait;
   niche; taxonomic diversity; traits; zooplankton
ID DIEL VERTICAL MIGRATION; BRITISH-COLUMBIA; INTERANNUAL VARIABILITY;
   CRUSTACEAN ZOOPLANKTON; ULTRAVIOLET-RADIATION; ADAPTIVE SIGNIFICANCE;
   SPECIES-DIVERSITY; TROPHIC STATE; BERING-SEA; PATTERNS
AB Functional trait diversity relates variation in the structure of biological communities to function and ecosystem processes. Zooplankton occupy a central position in marine food webs, modulating energy availability to higher trophic levels, while themselves affected by environmental variation. The use of traits with functional diversity potentially enables a more mechanistic understanding of variation and regulation of zooplankton communities than is possible with taxonomic diversity alone. Traits for 42 zooplankton species from the northeast subarctic Pacific were assembled from the literature and applied to a 16-year time series from the oceanographic Line P. We assembled traits on body size, ontogeny, habitat and feeding behaviours. Six major functional groupings were identified via a trait-based cluster dendrogram. Several functional diversity indices were also calculated, and compared with analogous taxonomic diversity indices. Analogue diversity indices were significantly correlated. Both types of diversity indices revealed some year-specific "anomalies" which were associated with broad-scale oceanographic and climatic regime shifts. We propose that the functional diversity approach may represent an additional ecological tool with which we can gain further understanding of zooplankton function and trophic linkages in a changing ocean, in part because functional traits are often based on easily measured morphological characters.
RI Sastri, Akash/D-7798-2013
OI Sastri, Akash/0000-0001-8075-0917; Beisner, Beatrix/0000-0001-6972-6887
TC 15
Z9 15
SN 0142-7873
EI 1464-3774
PD JUL-AUG
PY 2015
VL 37
IS 4
BP 712
EP 726
DI 10.1093/plankt/fbv045
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000359646700007
ER

PT J
AU Pennekamp, F
   Schtickzelle, N
   Petchey, OL
AF Pennekamp, Frank
   Schtickzelle, Nicolas
   Petchey, Owen L.
TI BEMOVI, software for extracting behavior and morphology from videos,
   illustrated with analyses of microbes
SO ECOLOGY AND EVOLUTION
DT Article
DE Microbial ecology; microcosm; trait-based ecology; video analysis
ID IMAGE-ANALYSIS; ECOLOGY; EVOLUTION; IDENTIFICATION; DYNAMICS; TRACKING;
   CLASSIFICATION; INDIVIDUALS; ZOOPLANKTON; POPULATION
AB Microbes are critical components of ecosystems and provide vital services (e.g., photosynthesis, decomposition, nutrient recycling). From the diverse roles microbes play in natural ecosystems, high levels of functional diversity result. Quantifying this diversity is challenging, because it is weakly associated with morphological differentiation. In addition, the small size of microbes hinders morphological and behavioral measurements at the individual level, as well as interactions between individuals. Advances in microbial community genetics and genomics, flow cytometry and digital analysis of still images are promising approaches. They miss out, however, on a very important aspect of populations and communities: the behavior of individuals. Video analysis complements these methods by providing in addition to abundance and trait measurements, detailed behavioral information, capturing dynamic processes such as movement, and hence has the potential to describe the interactions between individuals. We introduce BEMOVI, a package using the R and ImageJ software, to extract abundance, morphology, and movement data for tens to thousands of individuals in a video. Through a set of functions BEMOVI identifies individuals present in a video, reconstructs their movement trajectories through space and time, and merges this information into a single database. BEMOVI is a modular set of functions, which can be customized to allow for peculiarities of the videos to be analyzed, in terms of organisms features (e.g., morphology or movement) and how they can be distinguished from the background. We illustrate the validity and accuracy of the method with an example on experimental multispecies communities of aquatic protists. We show high correspondence between manual and automatic counts and illustrate how simultaneous time series of abundance, morphology, and behavior are obtained from BEMOVI. We further demonstrate how the trait data can be used with machine learning to automatically classify individuals into species and that information on movement behavior improves the predictive ability.
RI Petchey, Owen/D-8851-2011
OI Petchey, Owen/0000-0002-7724-1633; Pennekamp, Frank/0000-0003-0679-1045
TC 13
Z9 13
SN 2045-7758
PD JUL
PY 2015
VL 5
IS 13
BP 2584
EP 2595
DI 10.1002/ece3.1529
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000357962200008
PM 26257872
ER

PT J
AU Piyovaroff, AL
   Swift, C
   Battaglia, LL
   Kunz, B
   Platt, WJ
   Yoder, CL
AF Piyovaroff, Alexandria Lynn
   Swift, Cheryl
   Battaglia, Loretta L.
   Kunz, Brittany
   Platt, William J.
   Yoder, Carrie L.
TI Physiological Profiles as Indicators of Response to Hurricane
   Disturbance for Three Coastal Wetland Species
SO JOURNAL OF COASTAL RESEARCH
DT Article
DE Leaf mass per area; stomatal conductance; water potential; plant
   migration; sea level rise; Hurricane Katrina
ID SEA-LEVEL RISE; WOOD SPECIFIC-GRAVITY; FUNCTIONAL TRAITS; GULF-COAST;
   XYLEM CAVITATION; WEEKS BAY; FOREST; PLANT; LEAF; COMMUNITY
AB Hurricanes alter light and water availability via canopy damage and storm surge delivery and are expected to intensify with climate change. Plant species respond to environmental changes by making physiological adjustments in situ or through distribution changes. Three years after Hurricane Katrina, we compared functional traits and water relations among three species along the coenocline at Weeks Bay National Estuarine Research Reserve, Fairhope, Alabama, U.S.A. Based on posthurricane distribution changes for these species, we hypothesized that (1) Cladium mariscus, whose distribution expanded slightly, is responsive to increased light availability in the disturbed forest at the landward end but is strongly limited by water stress at its seaward edge; (2) Baccharis halimifolia, whose distribution shifted and abundance increased posthurricane, is responsive to increased light availability, cannot tolerate very low light levels or water logged soils, but can tolerate moderate salinity; and (3) Morella cerifera, whose distribution remained unchanged, would show little or no difference in measured functional traits and water relations at its landward vs. seaward edges. Cladium mariscus showed decreased water potential (Psi) at its seaward edge, but leaf mass per area (LMA) did not vary as forest cover increased landward. Baccharis halimifolia exhibited lowest LMA and highest Psi in the middle of its distribution, but was least vulnerable to cavitation (Psi(50)) with increased forest cover. Morella cerifera exhibited no difference in water stress, wood density, or Psi(50) across its distribution. Our results suggest differences in physiological response to light availability and water stress may affect the postdisturbance distribution of plant species and influence changes in distribution of species exposed to chronic sea level rise.
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 0749-0208
EI 1551-5036
PD JUL
PY 2015
VL 31
IS 4
BP 986
EP 993
DI 10.2112/JCOASTRES-D-14-00073.1
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Physical Geography; Geology
UT WOS:000358027900019
ER

PT J
AU Albouy, C
   Leprieur, F
   Le Loc'h, F
   Mouquet, N
   Meynard, CN
   Douzery, EJP
   Mouillot, D
AF Albouy, Camille
   Leprieur, Fabien
   Le Loc'h, Francois
   Mouquet, Nicolas
   Meynard, Christine N.
   Douzery, Emmanuel J. P.
   Mouillot, David
TI Projected impacts of climate warming on the functional and phylogenetic
   components of coastal Mediterranean fish biodiversity
SO ECOGRAPHY
DT Article
ID SPECIES DISTRIBUTIONS; MARINE FISHES; DIVERSITY; SEA; ECOSYSTEM;
   ASSEMBLAGES; EXTINCTION; PATTERNS; SCALE; CONSEQUENCES
AB Climate warming affects biodiversity distribution across all ecosystems. However, beyond changes in species richness, impacts on other biodiversity components are still overlooked, particularly in the marine realm. Here we forecasted the potential effect of climate warming on the phylogenetic and functional components of coastal Mediterranean fish biodiversity. To do so, we used species distribution models to project the potential distribution of 230 coastal fish species by the end of the 21st century based on the IPCC A2 scenario implemented with the Mediterranean climatic model NEMOMED8. From these projections, we assessed the changes in phylogenetic (PD) and functional diversity (FD) of fish assemblages at multiple spatial scales using a dated molecular phylogeny and an extensive functional trait database. At the scale of the entire Mediterranean Sea, the projected extinctions of 40 coastal fish species would lead to a concomitant erosion of PD and FD (13.6 and 3%, respectively). However, a null model revealed that species loss at this scale would not lead to a disproportionate erosion of PD and FD. Similar results were found when considering fish assemblages at the grid cell scale. Indeed, at this scale, the projected changes in species richness would lead to unexpected losses of PD and FD for localized and small areas only. A disproportionate erosion of PD under climate warming was only forecasted when analysing fish assemblages at an intermediate spatial scale, namely the Mediterranean marine ecoregions. Overall, our results emphasize the importance of considering multiple spatial scales when assessing potential impacts of climate warming on the multiple components marine biodiversity.
RI Meynard, Christine/B-2082-2010; Le Loc'h, Francois/A-5038-2008; albouy,
   camille/H-9317-2012
OI Meynard, Christine/0000-0002-5983-6289; Le Loc'h,
   Francois/0000-0002-3372-6997; albouy, camille/0000-0003-1629-2389
TC 9
Z9 9
SN 0906-7590
EI 1600-0587
PD JUL
PY 2015
VL 38
IS 7
BP 681
EP 689
DI 10.1111/ecog.01254
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000357135900004
ER

PT J
AU Rios-Touma, B
   Prescott, C
   Axtell, S
   Kondolf, GM
AF Rios-Touma, B.
   Prescott, C.
   Axtell, S.
   Kondolf, G. M.
TI Habitat Restoration in the Context of Watershed Prioritization: The
   Ecological Performance of Urban Stream Restoration Projects in Portland,
   Oregon
SO RIVER RESEARCH AND APPLICATIONS
DT Article
DE bio-monitoring; restoration success; habitat enhancement;
   macroinvertebrates; north-west streams; Tryon Creek
ID RIVER RESTORATION; MACROINVERTEBRATE COMMUNITIES; PACIFIC-NORTHWEST;
   SPECIES TRAITS; RUNNING WATERS; ECOSYSTEMS; DIVERSITY; REHABILITATION;
   HETEROGENEITY; CALIFORNIA
AB In Portland (Oregon, USA), restoration actions have been undertaken at the watershed scale (e.g. revegetation and stormwater management) to improve water quality and, where water quality and quantity are adequate at the reach scale, to increase habitat heterogeneity. Habitat enhancement in urban streams can be important for threatened species, but challenging, because of altered catchment hydrology and urban encroachment on floodplains and channel banks. To evaluate reach-scale restoration projects in the Tryon Creek watershed, we sampled benthic macroinvertebrates and conducted habitat quality surveys pre-project and over 4years post-project. Species sensitive to pollution and diversity of trophic groups increased after restoration. Taxonomic diversity increased after restoration but was still low compared with reference streams. We found no significant changes in trait proportions and functional diversity. Functional diversity, proportion of shredders and semivoltine invertebrates were significantly higher in reference streams than in the restored stream reaches. We hypothesized that inputs of coarse particulate organic matter and land use at watershed scale may explain the differences in biodiversity between restored and reference stream reaches. Habitat variables did not change from pre-project to post-project, so they could not explain community changes. This may have been partly attributable to insensitivity of the visual estimate methods used but likely also reflects the importance of watershed variables on aquatic biotasuggesting watershed actions may be more effective for the ecological recovery of streams. For future projects, we recommend multihabitat benthic sampling supported by studies of channel geomorphology to better understand stream response to restoration actions. Copyright (c) 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
OI Rios-Touma, Blanca/0000-0002-3921-0908
TC 12
Z9 12
SN 1535-1459
EI 1535-1467
PD JUL
PY 2015
VL 31
IS 6
BP 755
EP 766
DI 10.1002/rra.2769
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Water Resources
UT WOS:000357799300010
ER

PT J
AU O'Connor, NE
   Bracken, MES
   Crowe, TP
   Donohue, I
AF O'Connor, Nessa E.
   Bracken, Matthew E. S.
   Crowe, Tasman P.
   Donohue, Ian
TI Nutrient enrichment alters the consequences of species loss
SO JOURNAL OF ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE algae; benthic; biodiversity; ecosystem functioning; grazing; marine;
   nutrient enrichment; plant-herbivore interactions; rock pools
ID ROCKY INTERTIDAL COMMUNITY; CONSUMER DIVERSITY; BIODIVERSITY LOSS;
   BOTTOM-UP; TOP-DOWN; ENVIRONMENTAL CONTEXT; PRIMARY PRODUCTIVITY; MARINE
   BIODIVERSITY; SEAWEED ASSEMBLAGES; PRIMARY PRODUCERS
AB Loss of biodiversity and nutrient enrichment are two of the most pervasive drivers of change in ecosystems globally. However, little is known about how these disturbances interact to affect ecosystem functioning. We established a field experiment to test for effects of loss of consumer species on algal assemblages (richness and assemblage structure) and ecosystem functioning (ecosystem productivity and algal biomass accumulation) on rocky shores. We manipulated the presence of three common molluscan grazer species in newly created rock pools over 13months. Our grazer manipulation was based on a subtractive experimental design, and we also manipulated nutrient concentrations to evaluate explicitly how resource availability affected the consequences of species loss. We found that the effects of loss of grazer species on algal assemblages and their functioning depended strongly on both the identity of the grazer species lost and of those remaining in the community. Moreover, the effects of loss of species depended on nutrient availability, making it extremely difficult to predict the effects of species loss generally without detailed knowledge of a system. Our results demonstrate clearly that the effects of grazer species loss on primary producers and ecosystem functioning may not be generalisable based on grazer functional roles or traits.Synthesis. Our findings highlight the need to include key physical drivers, such as nutrient availability, explicitly into biodiversity-ecosystem functioning models in order to move towards a predictive framework that incorporates the effects of both environmental heterogeneity and anthropogenic stressors.
RI Donohue, Ian/A-7270-2010
OI Donohue, Ian/0000-0002-4698-6448; Bracken, Matthew/0000-0002-0068-7485;
   O'Connor, Nessa/0000-0002-3133-0913
TC 15
Z9 15
SN 0022-0477
EI 1365-2745
PD JUL
PY 2015
VL 103
IS 4
BP 862
EP 870
DI 10.1111/1365-2745.12415
SC Plant Sciences; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000356630600009
ER

PT J
AU Smith, MD
   Fulton, EA
   Day, RW
AF Smith, Michael D.
   Fulton, Elizabeth A.
   Day, Robert W.
TI Using an Atlantis model of the southern Benguela to explore the response
   of ecosystem indicators for fisheries management
SO ENVIRONMENTAL MODELLING & SOFTWARE
DT Article
DE Ecosystem modelling; Atlantis; Southern Benguela; Ecosystem indicators;
   Ecosystem-based fisheries management
ID SARDINE SARDINOPS-SAGAX; SMALL PELAGIC FISH; CAPE FUR-SEAL; ANCHOVY
   ENGRAULIS-ENCRASICOLUS; HAKES MERLUCCIUS CAPENSIS; INDIVIDUAL-BASED
   MODEL; LONG-TERM TRENDS; MARINE ECOSYSTEMS; REGIME SHIFTS; FUTURE
   CONSUMPTION
AB Atlantis is a whole-of-system modelling framework developed for Management Strategy Evaluation. This paper describes an Atlantis model that was built to simulate the southern Benguela ecosystem and its major associated fisheries to assist fisheries management in the region. We divided the region into spatial zones based on hydrodynamics, current fishing management, and important ecosystem processes. We divided the biological components of the system into functional groups based on trophic interaction, life history traits and fisheries management objectives. We evaluated the model against historical data and known ecosystem interactions (such as competition and predation), and found that it simulates important ecological processes well at multiple trophic levels. We tested the model under fishing pressure scenarios and evaluated the performance of common ecosystem-level indicators. The response of the modelled system (as shown by indicators) was in line with expected behaviour of the indicators, reinforcing our confidence in the usefulness of the model. (C) 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
RI Fulton, Elizabeth/A-2871-2008; Day, Robert/K-6052-2012
OI Fulton, Elizabeth/0000-0002-5904-7917; Day, Robert/0000-0001-5913-2292
TC 12
Z9 12
SN 1364-8152
EI 1873-6726
PD JUL
PY 2015
VL 69
BP 23
EP 41
DI 10.1016/j.envsoft.2015.03.002
SC Computer Science; Engineering; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000356548800003
ER

PT J
AU Poteat, MD
   Jacobus, LM
   Buchwalter, DB
AF Poteat, Monica D.
   Jacobus, Luke M.
   Buchwalter, David B.
TI The importance of retaining a phylogenetic perspective in traits-based
   community analyses
SO FRESHWATER BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE aquatic insects; metals; physiology; traits; variability
ID SPECIES TRAITS; EVOLUTIONARY PATTERNS; AQUATIC ORGANISMS; STREAM
   ECOLOGY; SIZE; EPHEMEROPTERA; INSECTS; TAXONOMY; HABITAT; RIVERS
AB Many environmental stressors manifest their effects via physiological processes (traits) that can differ significantly among species and species groups. We compiled available data for three traits related to the bioconcentration of the toxic metal cadmium (Cd) from 42 species representing the aquatic insect orders Ephemeroptera (mayflies), Plecoptera (stoneflies) and Trichoptera (caddisflies). These traits included the propensity to take up Cd from water (uptake rate constant, k(u)), the ability to excrete Cd (efflux rate constant, k(e)) and the net result of these two processes (bioconcentration factor). Ranges in these Cd bioaccumulation traits varied in magnitude across clades (some clades had a greater tendency to bioaccumulate Cd than others). Overlap in the ranges of trait values among different clades was common and highlights situations where species from different lineages can share a similar trait state, but represent the high end of possible physiological values for one clade and the low end for another. Variance around the mean trait states differed widely across clades, suggesting that some groups (e.g. Ephemerellidae) are inherently more variable than others (e.g. Perlidae). Thus, trait variability/lability is at least partially a function of lineage. Akaike information criterion comparisons of statistical models were more often driven by lineage than by the other tested potential biological or ecological explanations. Lineage-driven models generally improved with increasing taxonomic resolution. Together, these findings suggest that lineage provides context for the analysis of species traits and that failure to consider lineage in community-based analysis of traits may obscure important patterns of species responses to environmental change.
OI Buchwalter, David/0000-0002-4372-1268
TC 7
Z9 8
SN 0046-5070
EI 1365-2427
PD JUL
PY 2015
VL 60
IS 7
BP 1330
EP 1339
DI 10.1111/fwb.12571
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000356370800008
ER

PT J
AU Minden, V
   Kleyer, M
AF Minden, Vanessa
   Kleyer, Michael
TI Ecosystem multifunctionality of coastal marshes is determined by key
   plant traits
SO JOURNAL OF VEGETATION SCIENCE
DT Article
DE Effect traits; Functional ecology; Multifunctionality; Path analysis;
   Productivity; Response traits; Salt marsh; Structural equation modelling
ID STRUCTURAL EQUATION MODELS; SEA-LEVEL RISE; SALT MARSHES; ECONOMICS
   SPECTRUM; FUNCTIONAL TRAITS; VEGETATION SUCCESSION; ABOVEGROUND BIOMASS;
   SPECIES RICHNESS; BRANTA-LEUCOPSIS; LEAF ECONOMICS
AB QuestionsAs biodiversity losses increase due to global change and human-induced habitat destruction, the relationships between plant traits and ecosystem properties can provide a new level of understanding ecosystem complexity. Using a functional response-effect approach, we show that multiple components of the carbon cycle are determined by a few plant traits, which in turn are strongly affected by environmental conditions.
   LocationSalt marshes, northwest Germany.
   MethodsWe explored responses of morphological, chemical and biomass-related plant traits to environmental drivers and examined their effects on carbon cycle properties, i.e. above-ground biomass, above-ground net primary productivity and decomposition. The combined analysis between environmental parameters, functional traits and ecosystem properties used structural equation modelling (SEM).
   ResultsImportant response and effect traits were leaf dry matter content (LDMC) and below-ground dry mass (BDM, responding to groundwater level and salinity) and leaf C:N ratio (responding to inundation frequency). Inundation and salinity led to increased allocation to below-ground biomass and salt stress adaptation in leaves, which translated into increased decomposition rates. Release from these abiotic controls resulted in standing biomass accumulation, which was controlled by LDMC and canopy height as key traits.
   ConclusionsThese findings demonstrate the interacting effects of non-consumable environmental factors and soil resources on morphological, chemical and biomass traits, which affected carbon cycle properties. Loss of species from the community has the potential to change the relationships between environment and vegetation-based ecosystem properties and therefore elicit effects on the multifunctionality of the entire and adjacent ecosystems.
TC 6
Z9 7
SN 1100-9233
EI 1654-1103
PD JUL
PY 2015
VL 26
IS 4
BP 651
EP 662
DI 10.1111/jvs.12276
SC Plant Sciences; Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Forestry
UT WOS:000356811300006
ER

PT J
AU Klein, N
   Neenan, JM
   Scheyer, TM
   Griebeler, EM
AF Klein, Nicole
   Neenan, James M.
   Scheyer, Torsten M.
   Griebeler, Eva Maria
TI Growth patterns and life-history strategies in Placodontia (Diapsida:
   Sauropterygia)
SO ROYAL SOCIETY OPEN SCIENCE
DT Article
DE growth record; logistic growth model; von Bertalanffy growth model;
   growth marks; non-annual rest lines
ID LONG-BONE HISTOLOGY; AGE-DETERMINATION; MARINE REPTILES; PROSAUROPOD
   DINOSAUR; CARETTA-CARETTA; NEW-ZEALAND; BODY-SIZE; SKELETOCHRONOLOGY;
   EVOLUTION; PHYSIOLOGY
AB Placodontia is a clade of durophagous, near shore marine reptiles from Triassic sediments of modern-day Europe, Middle East and China. Although much is known about their primary anatomy and palaeoecology, relatively little has been published regarding their life history, i.e. ageing, maturation and growth. Here, growth records derived from long bone histological data of placodont individuals are described and modelled to assess placodont growth and life-history strategies. Growth modelling methods are used to confirm traits documented in the growth record (age at onset of sexual maturity, age when asymptotic length was achieved, age at death, maximum longevity) and also to estimate undocumented traits. Based on these growth models, generalized estimates of these traits are established for each taxon. Overall differences in bone tissue types and resulting growth curves indicate different growth patterns and life-history strategies between different taxa of Placodontia. Psephoderma and Paraplacodus grew with lamellar-zonal bone tissue type and show growth patterns as seen in modern reptiles. Placodontia indet. aff. Cyamodus and some Placodontia indet. show a unique combination of fibrolamellar bone tissue regularly stratified by growth marks, a pattern absent in modern sauropsids. The bone tissue type of Placodontia indet. aff. Cyamodus and Placodontia indet. indicates a significantly increased basal metabolic rate when compared with modern reptiles. Double lines of arrested growth, non-annual rest lines in annuli, and subcycles that stratify zones suggest high dependence of placodont growth on endogenous and exogenous factors. Histological and modelled differences within taxa point to high individual developmental plasticity but sexual dimorphism in growth patterns and the presence of different taxa in the sample cannot be ruled out.
OI Neenan, James/0000-0002-8215-5748; Scheyer, Torsten/0000-0002-6301-8983
TC 9
Z9 9
SN 2054-5703
PD JUL
PY 2015
VL 2
IS 7
AR 140440
DI 10.1098/rsos.140440
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000377966100007
PM 26587259
ER

PT J
AU Satdichanh, M
   Millet, J
   Heinimann, A
   Nanthavong, K
   Harrison, RD
AF Satdichanh, Manichanh
   Millet, Jerome
   Heinimann, Andreas
   Nanthavong, Khamseng
   Harrison, Rhett D.
TI Using Plant Functional Traits and Phylogenies to Understand Patterns of
   Plant Community Assembly in a Seasonal Tropical Forest in Lao PDR
SO PLOS ONE
DT Article
ID COASTAL CALIFORNIA; RAIN-FOREST; ECOLOGY; DIVERSITY; WORLDWIDE;
   THICKNESS; DISTANCE; DENSITY; SCALES; TREES
AB Plant functional traits reflect different evolutionary responses to environmental variation, and among extant species determine the outcomes of interactions between plants and their environment, including other plant species. Thus, combining phylogenetic and trait-based information can be a powerful approach for understanding community assembly processes across a range of spatial scales. We used this approach to investigate tree community composition at Phou Khao Khouay National Park (18 degrees 14'-18 degrees 32'N; 102 degrees 38'-102 degrees 59' E), Laos, where several distinct forest types occur in close proximity. The aim of our study was to examine patterns of plant community assembly across the strong environmental gradients evident at our site. We hypothesized that differences in tree community composition were being driven by an underlying gradient in soil conditions. Thus, we predicted that environmental filtering would predominate at the site and that the filtering would be strongest on sandier soil with low pH, as these are the conditions least favorable to plant growth. We surveyed eleven 0.25 ha (50x50 m) plots for all trees above 10 cm dbh (1221 individual trees, including 47 families, 70 genera and 123 species) and sampled soils in each plot. For each species in the community, we measured 11 commonly studied plant functional traits covering both the leaf and wood economic spectrum traits and we reconstructed a phylogenetic tree for 115 of the species in the community using rbcL and matK sequences downloaded from Genebank (other species were not available). Finally we compared the distribution of trait values and species at two scales (among plots and 10x10m subplots) to examine trait and phylogenetic community structures. Although there was strong evidence that an underlying soil gradient was determining patterns of species composition at the site, our results did not support the hypothesis that the environmental filtering dominated community assembly processes. For the measured plant functional traits there was no consistent pattern of trait dispersion across the site, either when traits were considered individually or when combined in a multivariate analysis. However, there was a significant correlation between the degree of phylogenetic dispersion and the first principle component axis (PCA1) for the soil parameters. Moreover, the more phylogenetically clustered plots were on sandier soils with lower pH. Hence, we suggest that the community assembly processes across our sitemay reflect the influence of more conserved traits that we did not measure. Nevertheless, our results are equivocal and other interpretations are possible. Our study illustrates some difficulties in combining trait and phylogenetic approaches that may result from the complexities of integrating spatial and evolutionary processes that vary at different scales.
OI Heinimann, Andreas/0000-0001-8905-8169
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 1932-6203
PD JUN 26
PY 2015
VL 10
IS 6
AR e0130151
DI 10.1371/journal.pone.0130151
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000358147500054
PM 26115369
ER

PT J
AU Farinas, TH
   Bacher, C
   Soudant, D
   Belin, C
   Barille, L
AF Farinas, Tania Hernandez
   Bacher, Cedric
   Soudant, Dominique
   Belin, Catherine
   Barille, Laurent
TI Assessing phytoplankton realized niches using a French national
   phytoplankton monitoring network
SO ESTUARINE COASTAL AND SHELF SCIENCE
DT Article
DE phytoplankton; environment; niche position; tolerance; kernel density;
   outlying mean index
ID EASTERN ENGLISH-CHANNEL; NORTH-SEA; MARINE-PHYTOPLANKTON;
   CLIMATE-CHANGE; COSCINODISCUS-WAILESII; SPECIES DISTRIBUTION; COMMUNITY
   ECOLOGY; FUNCTIONAL TRAITS; SOUTHERN BIGHT; TEMPERATURE
AB Relating environmental factors to species occurrence is a fundamental step in a better understanding of the community structure, the spatial and temporal dynamics of populations and how species may respond to environmental changes. In this paper, we used phytoplankton occurrence data, from a French national phytoplankton monitoring network, and environmental variables with the aim of characterizing the realized ecological niches of phytoplankton groups. We selected 35 phytoplankton taxa representing the most important taxa in terms of occurrence frequency and abundance along the French coast of the eastern English Channel, the Southern Bight of the North Sea and the Atlantic Ocean. We show that environmental variables such as nutrient concentration, water temperature, irradiance and turbidity can be considered key factors controlling phytoplankton dynamics and influencing the community structure. By using a statistical framework based on an ordination technique the community structure was analyzed and interpreted in terms of niche overlap, marginality and tolerance. The most marginal taxon was Dactyliosolen and the most tolerant was Skeletonema. Non-marginal taxonomic units could be generalist and specialist, while marginal taxa were rather specialist. Specialist and marginal taxa globally showed lower values of overlap. (C) 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
OI Belin, Catherine/0000-0002-4423-4488; Soudant,
   Dominique/0000-0001-6826-9741; Barille, Laurent/0000-0001-5138-2684;
   Bacher, Cedric/0000-0001-6090-4667
TC 10
Z9 10
SN 0272-7714
EI 1096-0015
PD JUN 20
PY 2015
VL 159
BP 15
EP 27
DI 10.1016/j.ecss.2015.03.010
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000355363300002
ER

PT J
AU Berthelsen, AK
   Hewitt, JE
   Taylor, RB
AF Berthelsen, Anna K.
   Hewitt, Judi E.
   Taylor, Richard B.
TI Biological traits and taxonomic composition of invertebrate assemblages
   associated with coralline turf along an environmental gradient
SO MARINE ECOLOGY PROGRESS SERIES
DT Article
DE Temperate rocky reef; Diversity; Algal morphology
ID SMALL MOBILE INVERTEBRATES; MARINE BENTHIC ECOSYSTEMS; SPECIES TRAITS;
   FUNCTIONAL COMPOSITION; ADRIATIC SEA; ANALYSIS BTA; NEW-ZEALAND; ALGAL
   TURF; FAUNA; COMMUNITIES
AB Biological traits relating to the behaviour, morphology and life history of organisms can influence ecological functioning, and this principle is becoming increasingly used to examine the functional response of communities to environmental variation. We quantified the taxonomic and biological traits composition, and the overall abundance and richness, of small (1-8 mm) mobile invertebrate assemblages inhabiting subtidal coralline algal turf (Corallina officinalis) along an environmental gradient ranging from (1) relatively deep, wave-exposed sites with short turf containing a low proportion of fine sediment to (2) shallow wave-sheltered sites with taller turf containing a higher proportion of fine sediment. Turf fauna were diverse (118 taxa) and abundant (12 000-53 000 ind. m(-2)), with assemblages dominated by amphipods and gastropods. Total abundances of invertebrates were higher at the wave-exposed sites. When analysed in multivariate space using proportional abundance, replicates based on taxonomic composition grouped more strongly by site along the overall gradient than those based on traits. As proportions of biological traits remained relatively stable along the gradient, numbers of all traits possessed by individuals were higher at the wave-exposed end of the gradient. Although some environmental variables contributed significantly to explaining multivariate trait and taxa patterns, most individual correlations between environmental variables and traits and taxa were weak. This study shows that biological traits can be shared between taxonomically distinct assemblages of turf-dwelling invertebrates, and indicates a relatively small influence overall of environmental variables on the composition of traits and taxa.
TC 5
Z9 5
SN 0171-8630
EI 1616-1599
PD JUN 18
PY 2015
VL 530
BP 15
EP 27
DI 10.3354/meps11337
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology;
   Oceanography
UT WOS:000356938800002
ER

PT J
AU Bhowmik, AK
   Schafer, RB
AF Bhowmik, Avit Kumar
   Schaefer, Ralf B.
TI Large Scale Relationship between Aquatic Insect Traits and Climate
SO PLOS ONE
DT Article
ID MACROINVERTEBRATE COMMUNITIES; STREAM MACROINVERTEBRATES; ECOLOGICAL
   PREFERENCES; BODY-SIZE; PATTERNS; INVERTEBRATES; VULNERABILITY;
   BIODIVERSITY; SENSITIVITY; ECOSYSTEMS
AB Climate is the predominant environmental driver of freshwater assemblage pattern on large spatial scales, and traits of freshwater organisms have shown considerable potential to identify impacts of climate change. Although several studies suggest traits that may indicate vulnerability to climate change, the empirical relationship between freshwater assemblage trait composition and climate has been rarely examined on large scales. We compared the responses of the assumed climate-associated traits from six grouping features to 35 bioclimatic indices (similar to 18 km resolution) for five insect orders (Diptera, Ephemeroptera, Odonata, Plecoptera and Trichoptera), evaluated their potential for changing distribution pattern under future climate change and identified the most influential bioclimatic indices. The data comprised 782 species and 395 genera sampled in 4,752 stream sites during 2006 and 2007 in Germany (similar to 357,000 km(2) spatial extent). We quantified the variability and spatial autocorrelation in the traits and orders that are associated with the combined and individual bioclimatic indices. Traits of temperature preference grouping feature that are the products of several other underlying climate-associated traits, and the insect order Ephemeroptera exhibited the strongest response to the bioclimatic indices as well as the highest potential for changing distribution pattern. Regarding individual traits, insects in general and ephemeropterans preferring very cold temperature showed the highest response, and the insects preferring cold and trichopterans preferring moderate temperature showed the highest potential for changing distribution. We showed that the seasonal radiation and moisture are the most influential bioclimatic aspects, and thus changes in these aspects may affect the most responsive traits and orders and drive a change in their spatial distribution pattern. Our findings support the development of trait-based metrics to predict and detect climate-related changes of freshwater assemblages.
RI Schaefer, Ralf/E-1926-2011; Bhowmik, Avit/C-4820-2013
OI Schaefer, Ralf/0000-0003-3510-1701; Bhowmik, Avit/0000-0002-7137-0741
TC 6
Z9 6
SN 1932-6203
PD JUN 16
PY 2015
VL 10
IS 6
AR e0130025
DI 10.1371/journal.pone.0130025
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000356542300038
PM 26080074
ER

PT J
AU Aberhan, M
   Kiessling, W
AF Aberhan, Martin
   Kiessling, Wolfgang
TI Persistent ecological shifts in marine molluscan assemblages across the
   end-Cretaceous mass extinction
SO PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES OF THE UNITED STATES OF
   AMERICA
DT Article
DE end-Cretaceous mass extinction; regime shift; functional groups;
   mollusks; ecospace
ID PALEOGENE BOUNDARY; COASTAL-PLAIN; TERTIARY BOUNDARY; FOSSIL RECORD;
   CHICXULUB IMPACT; EAST TEXAS; RECOVERY; PATTERNS; PRODUCTIVITY;
   ECOSYSTEMS
AB Contemporary biodiversity loss and population declines threaten to push the biosphere toward a tipping point with irreversible effects on ecosystem composition and function. As a potential example of a global-scale regime shift in the geological past, we assessed ecological changes across the end-Cretaceous mass extinction based on molluscan assemblages at four well-studied sites. By contrasting preextinction and postextinction rank abundance and numerical abundance in 19 molluscan modes of life-each defined as a unique combination of mobility level, feeding mode, and position relative to the substrate-we find distinct shifts in ecospace utilization, which significantly exceed predictions from null models. The magnitude of change in functional traits relative to normal temporal fluctuations at far-flung sites indicates that molluscan assemblages shifted to differently structured systems and faunal response was global. The strengths of temporal ecological shifts, however, are mostly within the range of preextinction site-to-site variability, demonstrating that local ecological turnover was similar to geographic variation over a broad latitudinal range. In conjunction with varied site-specific temporal patterns of individual modes of life, these spatial and temporal heterogeneities argue against a concerted phase shift of molluscan assemblages from one well-defined regime to another. At a broader ecological level, by contrast, congruent tendencies emerge and suggest deterministic processes. These patterns comprise the well-known increase of deposit-feeding mollusks in postextinction assemblages and increases in predators and predator- resistant modes of life, i.e., those characterized by elevated mobility and infaunal life habits.
RI Kiessling, Wolfgang/E-2259-2015
OI Kiessling, Wolfgang/0000-0002-1088-2014
TC 15
Z9 15
SN 0027-8424
PD JUN 9
PY 2015
VL 112
IS 23
BP 7207
EP 7212
DI 10.1073/pnas.1422248112
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000355823200042
PM 25941366
ER

PT J
AU Stier, T
   Drent, J
   Thieltges, DW
AF Stier, Tabea
   Drent, Jan
   Thieltges, David W.
TI Trematode infections reduce clearance rates and condition in blue
   mussels Mytilus edulis
SO MARINE ECOLOGY PROGRESS SERIES
DT Article
DE Parasitism; trematodes; bivalve feeding
ID RENICOLA-ROSCOVITA; FILTRATION-RATES; BIVALVE MOLLUSKS; WATER-QUALITY;
   LABIAL PALPS; GROWTH; FEEDERS; ALGAL
AB Suspension feeders are important players in coastal food webs: by filtering particles suspended in the water column and depositing faeces and pseudofaeces in sediments, they mediate the coupling of pelagic primary and benthic secondary production. However, the potential interference of parasite infections on suspension feeding is not well investigated. We experimentally determined the effect of infections with metacercariae of the common trematode Renicola roscovita on clearance rates and condition of blue mussels Mytilus edulis. We also investigated whether there were differences in the effects of infections between different size classes of mussels. Using controlled infections under lab conditions, our experiment showed that infections significantly reduced the clearance rates of mussels. This effect was less pronounced in small (42% reduction) than in large mussels (71%). In addition, infections significantly reduced mussel body mass index in large (23% reduction) and small (17%) mussels compared to uninfected mussels. These reductions most likely resulted from a combined effect of an interference of the parasites with the mussel's feeding apparatus (with the palps being the preferred infection site of the parasite) and of the energetic demands of the parasites (with metacercariae growing in size after initial infection). These negative effects on mussel filter feeding capacity indicate that parasites can alter a crucially important functional trait of marine suspension feeders.
RI Thieltges, David W./E-5719-2015
TC 5
Z9 5
SN 0171-8630
EI 1616-1599
PD JUN 8
PY 2015
VL 529
BP 137
EP 144
DI 10.3354/meps11250
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology;
   Oceanography
UT WOS:000356076000010
ER

PT J
AU Casado, C
   Molla, S
   Gonzalez, JM
   Roblas, N
   Descals, E
AF Casado, Carmen
   Molla, Salvador
   Manuel Gonzalez, Jose
   Roblas, Neftali
   Descals, Enrique
TI Leaf litter breakdown in streams of Sierra de Guadarrama National Park
   (Madrid)
SO LIMNETICA
DT Article
DE Breakdown rate; litter bags; siliceous headwater mountain streams;
   macroinvertebrates; aquatic hyphomycetes
ID HEADWATER STREAMS; ORGANIC-MATTER; FUNCTIONAL INDICATORS; MEDITERRANEAN
   STREAM; NORTHERN SPAIN; LAND-USE; DECOMPOSITION; RIVER; INTEGRITY;
   COMMUNITY
AB The main goal of this study was to identify the main drivers of natural variability of leaf litter processing in six well preserved Mediterranean mountain streams in the Sierra de Guadarrama, through the analysis of the breakdown rates of alder litter, content and dynamics of leaf nutrients, and associated fungal and invertebrates communities. In general, breakdown rates of alder leaves, both exponential (k = 0.013 +/- 0.005 dd(-1), k = 0.041 +/- 0.011 d(-1)) and lineal (b = 0.470 +/- 0.121 % PSLC dd(-1), b' = 1.522 +/- 0.153 % PSLC d(-1)) were very high. Variability in breakdown rates among streams was not correlated to environmental characteristics (discharge, slope or water temperature) neither to stream water characteristics (nutrient concentration, pH, or conductivity). This may be due to the low environmental heterogeneity observed among these streams and also because the physical factors that could regulate this process were outweighed by biological processes that mask them. The highest breakdown rates were recorded in the coldest waters where the activity of decomposers aquatic fungi was very low (measured by sporulation rates, 98.36 +/- 148.84 conidia mg(-1) PSLC d(-1)), suggesting that consumer invertebrates played a key role in the faster leaf litter processing rates in these sites. Family richness (13.67 +/- 3.44 fam. bag(-1)) and macroinvertebrate density (25.33 +/- 10.42 ind bag(-1)), as well as shredder density (16.17 +/- 7.44 ind bag(-1)) did not show any relationship with the breakdown rates (p > 0.100, neither linear nor exponential rates). A positive relationship was only found between percentage of leaf litter lost and abundance of Limnephilidae (p < 0.010), that pointed out a higher relevance of shredder traits than their total abundance. Limnephilidae are caddisfly shredders adapted to low thermal regimes, they have large body and are able to feed on unconditioned litter debris and poor colonized by aquatic hyphomycetes, which seem to exert a decisive control over leaf litter processing rate in this type of aquatic ecosystems. Therefore, we can suppose that in colder headwater mountain streams consumer macroinvertebrates (shredders) might have a major relevance in the processing of litter debris whereas decomposers (aquatic hyphomycetes) would play an increasing role in warmer streams.
RI Carmen, Casado/B-8307-2016; Gonzalez, Jose/A-3835-2009
OI Gonzalez, Jose/0000-0001-7289-8321
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 0213-8409
EI 1989-1806
PD JUN
PY 2015
VL 34
IS 1
BP 115
EP 134
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000357244600010
ER

PT J
AU Branco, S
   Gladieux, P
   Ellison, CE
   Kuo, A
   LaButti, K
   Lipzen, A
   Grigoriev, IV
   Liao, HL
   Vilgalys, R
   Peay, KG
   Taylor, JW
   Bruns, TD
AF Branco, Sara
   Gladieux, Pierre
   Ellison, Christopher E.
   Kuo, Alan
   LaButti, Kurt
   Lipzen, Anna
   Grigoriev, Igor V.
   Liao, Hui-Ling
   Vilgalys, Rytas
   Peay, Kabir G.
   Taylor, John W.
   Bruns, Thomas D.
TI Genetic isolation between two recently diverged populations of a
   symbiotic fungus
SO MOLECULAR ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE adaptation; mycorrhizal fungi; population genomics; Suillus brevipes
ID ECTOMYCORRHIZAL BASIDIOMYCETE; RHIZOPOGON-VINICOLOR; SPECIES RICHNESS;
   LOCAL ADAPTATION; RUSSULA-BREVIPES; GENOMICS; ISLANDS; MECHANISMS;
   DISPERSAL; INSIGHTS
AB Fungi are an omnipresent and highly diverse group of organisms, making up a significant part of eukaryotic diversity. Little is currently known about the drivers of fungal population differentiation and subsequent divergence of species, particularly in symbiotic, mycorrhizal fungi. Here, we investigate the population structure and environmental adaptation in Suillus brevipes (Peck) Kuntze, a wind-dispersed soil fungus that is symbiotic with pine trees. We assembled and annotated the reference genome for Su.brevipes and resequenced the whole genomes of 28 individuals from coastal and montane sites in California. We detected two clearly delineated coast and mountain populations with very low divergence. Genomic divergence was restricted to few regions, including a region of extreme divergence containing a gene encoding for a membrane Na+/H+ exchanger known for enhancing salt tolerance in plants and yeast. Our results are consistent with a very recent split between the montane and coastal Su.brevipes populations, with few small genomic regions under positive selection and a pattern of dispersal and/or establishment limitation. Furthermore, we identify a putatively adaptive gene that motivates further functional analyses to link genotypes and phenotypes and shed light on the genetic basis of adaptive traits.
RI Gladieux, Pierre/D-1014-2014
OI Gladieux, Pierre/0000-0003-1929-1576; Peay, Kabir/0000-0002-7998-7412;
   Vilgalys, Rytas/0000-0001-8299-3605; Grigoriev, Igor/0000-0002-3136-8903
TC 32
Z9 34
SN 0962-1083
EI 1365-294X
PD JUN
PY 2015
VL 24
IS 11
BP 2747
EP 2758
DI 10.1111/mec.13132
SC Biochemistry & Molecular Biology; Environmental Sciences & Ecology;
   Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000355228800013
PM 25728665
ER

PT J
AU Farina, SC
   Near, TJ
   Bemis, WE
AF Farina, Stacy C.
   Near, Thomas J.
   Bemis, William E.
TI Evolution of the branchiostegal membrane and restricted gill openings in
   Actinopterygian fishes
SO JOURNAL OF MORPHOLOGY
DT Article
DE Actinopterygii; gill ventilation; convergent evolution
ID FUNCTIONAL-MORPHOLOGY; JET PROPULSION; DEEP-SEA; TELEOSTEI; PHYLOGENY;
   GENUS; DIVERSIFICATION; PHOTOPHORES; VENTILATION; PERCIFORMES
AB A phylogenetic survey is a powerful approach for investigating the evolutionary history of a morphological characteristic that has evolved numerous times without obvious functional implications. Restricted gill openings, an extreme modification of the branchiostegal membrane, are an example of such a characteristic. We examine the evolution of branchiostegal membrane morphology and highlight convergent evolution of restricted gill openings. We surveyed specimens from 433 families of actinopterygians for branchiostegal membrane morphology and measured head and body dimensions. We inferred a relaxed molecular clock phylogeny with branch length estimates based on nine nuclear genes sampled from 285 species that include all major lineages of Actinopterygii. We calculated marginal state reconstructions of four branchiostegal membrane conditions and found that restricted gill openings have evolved independently in at least 11 major actinopterygian clades, and the total number of independent origins of the trait is likely much higher. A principal component analysis revealed that fishes with restricted gill openings occupy a larger morphospace, as defined by our linear measurements, than do fishes with nonrestricted openings. We used a decision tree analysis of ecological data to determine if restricted gill openings are linked to certain environments. We found that fishes with restricted gill openings repeatedly occur under a variety of ecological conditions, although they are rare in open-ocean pelagic environments. We also tested seven ratios for their utility in distinguishing between fishes with and without restricted gill openings, and we propose a simple metric for quantifying restricted gill openings (RGO), defined as a ratio of the distance from the ventral midline to the gill opening relative to half the circumference of the head. Functional explanations for this specialized morphology likely differ within each clade, but its repeated evolution indicates a need for a better understanding of diversity of ventilatory morphology among fishes. J. Morphol. 276:681-694, 2015. (c) 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
OI Near, Thomas/0000-0002-7398-6670; Farina, Stacy/0000-0003-2479-1268
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 0362-2525
EI 1097-4687
PD JUN
PY 2015
VL 276
IS 6
BP 681
EP 694
DI 10.1002/jmor.20371
SC Anatomy & Morphology
UT WOS:000354740800005
PM 25678140
ER

PT J
AU Clare, DS
   Robinson, LA
   Frid, CLJ
AF Clare, D. S.
   Robinson, L. A.
   Frid, C. L. J.
TI Community variability and ecological functioning: 40 years of change in
   the North Sea benthos
SO MARINE ENVIRONMENTAL RESEARCH
DT Article
DE Biological traits analysis; Ecosystem function; effect traits;
   Functional compensation; Marine biodiversity; Regime shift; Temporal
   change; Time series
ID ECOSYSTEM FUNCTION; NORTHUMBERLAND COAST; SPECIES REDUNDANCY; BIOLOGICAL
   TRAITS; MARINE SEDIMENT; PLANT DIVERSITY; FOOD-WEB; BIODIVERSITY; FAUNA;
   CONSEQUENCES
AB Using established associations between species traits (life history, morphological and behavioural characteristics) and key ecological functions, we applied biological traits analysis (BTA) to investigate the consequences of 40 years of change in two North Sea benthic communities. Ecological functioning (trait composition) was found to be statistically indistinguishable across periods that differed significantly in taxonomic composition. A temporary alteration to functioning was, however, inferred at both sampling stations; coinciding with the North Sea regime shift of the 1980s. Trait composition recovered after 1 year at the station located inside the grounds of a trawl fishery, whereas the station located outside the main area of fishing activity underwent a six-year period of significantly altered, and temporally unstable, trait composition. A further alteration to functioning was inferred at the fished station, when the population of a newly established species rapidly increased in numbers. The results suggest that density compensation by characteristically similar (redundant) taxa acts to buffer changes to ecological functioning over time, but that functional stability is subject to aperiodic disruption due to substitutions of dissimilar taxa or uncompensated population fluctuations. The rate at which ecological functioning stabilises and recovers appears to be dependent on environmental context; e.g. disturbance regime. (C) 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
TC 6
Z9 6
SN 0141-1136
EI 1879-0291
PD JUN
PY 2015
VL 107
BP 24
EP 34
DI 10.1016/j.marenvres.2015.03.012
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology;
   Toxicology
UT WOS:000355046300003
PM 25876194
ER

PT J
AU Schriever, TA
   Bogan, MT
   Boersma, KS
   Canedo-Arguelles, M
   Jaeger, KL
   Olden, JD
   Lytle, DA
AF Schriever, Tiffany A.
   Bogan, Michael T.
   Boersma, Kate S.
   Canedo-Argueelles, Miguel
   Jaeger, Kristin L.
   Olden, Julian D.
   Lytle, David A.
TI Hydrology shapes taxonomic and functional structure of desert stream
   invertebrate communities
SO FRESHWATER SCIENCE
DT Article
DE ecological filter; species traits; temporary streams; disturbance;
   quantile regression; American Southwest
ID FOOD-CHAIN LENGTH; NATURAL FLOW REGIMES; MACROINVERTEBRATE COMMUNITIES;
   BIOLOGICAL TRAITS; CURRENT KNOWLEDGE; LIMITING FACTORS; SPECIES TRAITS;
   NEW-ZEALAND; DIVERSITY; RIVER
AB Hydrology is a fundamental factor influencing ecosystem dynamics, life-history strategies, and diversity patterns in running-water habitats. However, it remains unclear how hydrology may structure the taxonomic and functional composition of communities, especially in systems with high spatiotemporal variability in flow. We examined invertebrate diversity from 7 desert streams in the Huachuca Mountains of southeastern Arizona, USA, that span a flow permanence continuum from highly intermittent to perennial. We examined the relative roles of flow permanence, habitat size, season, and microhabitat in determining taxonomic and functional structure (according to 7 species traits compiled for 234 taxa) of these communities. We predicted that both functional and taxonomic diversity would be positively related to flow permanence and negatively related to the duration and number of stream drying events. As predicted, increased flow permanence was associated with increased functional richness, functional evenness, and taxonomic richness. Conversely, drying events reduced functional diversity across all measured indices. We found a saturating relationship between functional richness and taxonomic richness, indicating functional redundancy in species-rich communities, which may promote resilience of ecosystem function to environmental variation. Our study adds further evidence that hydrology is a key determinant of aquatic invertebrate diversity, and that stream hydroperiod strongly influences both functional and taxonomic diversity in arid-land streams.
RI Canedo-Arguelles, Miguel/L-6365-2014; Jaeger, Kristin/I-2677-2012
OI Canedo-Arguelles, Miguel/0000-0003-3864-7451; 
TC 35
Z9 35
SN 2161-9549
EI 2161-9565
PD JUN
PY 2015
VL 34
IS 2
BP 399
EP 409
DI 10.1086/680518
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000354387700001
ER

PT J
AU Roselli, L
   Paparella, F
   Stanca, E
   Basset, A
AF Roselli, L.
   Paparella, F.
   Stanca, E.
   Basset, A.
TI New data-driven method from 3D confocal microscopy for calculating
   phytoplankton cell biovolume
SO JOURNAL OF MICROSCOPY
DT Article
DE Biovolume; complex shape; confocal laser scanning microscopy;
   phytoplankton; 3D models; uncertainty
ID SURFACE-AREA; PLANKTON; ECOLOGY; MARINE; VOLUME; IDENTIFICATION;
   VISUALIZATION; PERSPECTIVES; COMMUNITIES; DIATOMS
AB Confocal laser scanner microscopy coupled with an image analysis system was used to directly determine the shape and calculate the biovolume of phytoplankton organisms by constructing 3D models of cells. The study was performed on Biceratium furca (Ehrenberg) Vanhoeffen, which is one of the most complex-shaped phytoplankton. Traditionally, biovolume is obtained from a standardized set of geometric models based on linear dimensions measured by light microscopy. However, especially in the case of complex-shaped cells, biovolume is affected by very large errors associated with the numerous manual measurements that this entails. We evaluate the accuracy of these traditional methods by comparing the results obtained using geometric models with direct biovolume measurement by image analysis. Our results show cell biovolume measurement based on decomposition into simple geometrical shapes can be highly inaccurate. Although we assume that the most accurate cell shape is obtained by 3D direct biovolume measurement, which is based on voxel counting, the intrinsic uncertainty of this method is explored and assessed. Finally, we implement a data-driven formula-based approach to the calculation of biovolume of this complex-shaped organism. On one hand, the model is obtained from 3D direct calculation. On the other hand, it is based on just two linear dimensions which can easily be measured by hand. This approach has already been used for investigating the complexities of morphology and for determining the 3D structure of cells. It could also represent a novel way to generalize scaling laws for biovolume calculation.
   Lay description MICROALGAE IN 3D - Phytoplankton are an extremely diverse, polyphyletic group of microscopic photosynthetic microalgae. They account for approximately half of Earth's primary productivity and differ in their edibility and nutritional value for higher trophic levels. Finally, many phytoplankton species can produce toxins that negatively affect water quality and higher levels of trophic food web. Phytoplankton cell shape and biovolume are commonly used as size descriptor in the study of phytoplankton ecology because of their potentiality to explain the organization of ecological communities and predict their reorganizations under global change. Traditionally, phytoplankton cell shape and biovolume is not measured directly but is obtained from a standardized set of geometric models based on linear dimensions measured by light microscopy. This commonly used method allows visualization and measurement in two dimensions (2D) yielding no information at all on the third dimension of phytoplankton cells. Inaccurate biovolume assessment resulting from geometric approximation leads to erroneous interpretation of eco-physiological processes and morpho-functional traits. Here, we propose a new method based on confocal microscopy coupled with an image analysis system (NIS Elements AR software, Nikon) to determine directly shape and biovolume by means 3D confocal images. We evaluate the accuracy of current methods by comparing the results obtained using geometric models with direct biovolume and shape. We also propose a simplified approach for calculating the biovolume of cells that might with time replace those based on geometrically composed shapes.
OI Roselli, Leonilde/0000-0002-0002-9415; Paparella,
   Francesco/0000-0003-1526-970X
TC 6
Z9 6
SN 0022-2720
EI 1365-2818
PD JUN
PY 2015
VL 258
IS 3
BP 200
EP 211
DI 10.1111/jmi.12233
SC Microscopy
UT WOS:000354741400004
PM 25787009
ER

PT J
AU Schmidt-Kloiber, A
   Hering, D
AF Schmidt-Kloiber, Astrid
   Hering, Daniel
TI www.freshwaterecology.info - An online tool that unifies, standardises
   and codifies more than 20,000 European freshwater organisms and their
   ecological preferences
SO ECOLOGICAL INDICATORS
DT Article
DE Fish; Macro-invertebrates; Macrophytes; Diatoms; Phytoplankton;
   Indicator traits
ID TRAIT-BASED APPROACH; LIFE-HISTORY TRAITS; CLIMATE-CHANGE; BENTHIC
   MACROINVERTEBRATES; TAXONOMIC RESOLUTION; SPECIES TRAITS; INVERTEBRATE
   COMMUNITIES; PUBLICATION PROCESS; RIVER RESTORATION; BIOLOGICAL TRAITS
AB Species' ecological preferences are progressively important for understanding distribution patterns, for conserving biodiversity or for assessing and evaluating the status of freshwater ecosystems. Comprehensive databases compiling species traits are already established in the terrestrial realm, but widely missing in freshwater science. We established a database for European taxa of five aquatic organism groups by compiling information on taxonomy, ecology and distribution based on extensive literature surveys, which were performed by experts for the targeted organism groups. The database includes fishes (654 taxa/21 ecological preferences), macro-invertebrates (8586/40), macrophytes (1083/5), diatoms (8868/36) and phytoplankton (1976/4). It is available online with various options and tools for finding information and has currently over 800 users. The reviewed literature as well as examples given in this paper, highlight the importance of the general availability of knowledge on ecological preferences for various aspects in ecological assessment. Freshwaterecology.info is considered a service for basic research, applied scientists, water managers or other stakeholders. It serves as base for bioassessment and monitoring. (C) 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
RI Hering, Daniel/D-4280-2012; Schmidt-Kloiber, Astrid/O-5278-2015
OI Schmidt-Kloiber, Astrid/0000-0001-8839-5913
TC 86
Z9 86
SN 1470-160X
EI 1872-7034
PD JUN
PY 2015
VL 53
BP 271
EP 282
DI 10.1016/j.ecolind.2015.02.007
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000352661900031
ER

PT J
AU Zardi, GI
   Nicastro, KR
   McQuaid, CD
   Castilho, R
   Costa, J
   Serrao, EA
   Pearson, GA
AF Zardi, Gerardo I.
   Nicastro, Katy R.
   McQuaid, Christopher D.
   Castilho, Rita
   Costa, Joana
   Serrao, Ester A.
   Pearson, Gareth A.
TI Intraspecific genetic lineages of a marine mussel show behavioural
   divergence and spatial segregation over a tropical/subtropical
   biogeographic transition
SO BMC EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE Genetic diversity; Marine connectivity; Perna perna
ID INVASIVE MYTILUS-GALLOPROVINCIALIS; INDIGENOUS PERNA-PERNA;
   MAXIMUM-LIKELIHOOD-ESTIMATION; CROSS-SPECIES AMPLIFICATION;
   SOUTH-AFRICA; WAVE EXPOSURE; POPULATION-STRUCTURE; ATTACHMENT STRENGTH;
   COALESCENT APPROACH; INTERTIDAL MUSSELS
AB Background: Intraspecific variability is seen as a central component of biodiversity. We investigated genetic differentiation, contemporary patterns of demographic connectivity and intraspecific variation of adaptive behavioural traits in two lineages of an intertidal mussel (Perna perna) across a tropical/subtropical biogeographic transition.
   Results: Microsatellite analyses revealed clear genetic differentiation between western (temperate) and eastern (subtropical/tropical) populations, confirming divergence previously detected with mitochondrial (COI) and nuclear (ITS) markers. Gene flow between regions was predominantly east-to-west and was only moderate, with higher heterozygote deficiency where the two lineages co-occur. This can be explained by differential selection and/or oceanographic dynamics acting as a barrier to larval dispersal. Common garden experiments showed that gaping (periodic closure and opening of the shell) and attachment to the substratum differed significantly between the two lineages. Western individuals gaped more and attached less strongly to the substratum than eastern ones.
   Conclusions: These behavioural differences are consistent with the geographic and intertidal distributions of each lineage along sharp environmental clines, indicating their strong adaptive significance. We highlight the functional role of diversity below the species level in evolutionary trends and the need to understand this when predicting biodiversity responses to environmental change.
RI Algarve, CCMAR/C-2603-2018; Castilho, Rita/B-6185-2008; Zardi,
   Gerardo/M-4026-2013; Serrao, Ester/C-6686-2012; Pearson,
   Gareth/J-3911-2013
OI Castilho, Rita/0000-0003-0727-3688; Zardi, Gerardo/0000-0001-8798-5794;
   Serrao, Ester/0000-0003-1316-658X; Pearson, Gareth/0000-0002-0768-464X;
   McQuaid, Christopher/0000-0002-3473-8308; Nicastro,
   Katy/0000-0002-7071-141X; Costa, Joana/0000-0002-3482-840X
TC 7
Z9 7
SN 1471-2148
PD MAY 31
PY 2015
VL 15
AR 100
DI 10.1186/s12862-015-0366-5
SC Evolutionary Biology; Genetics & Heredity
UT WOS:000355299100002
PM 26026663
ER

PT J
AU Guo, HY
   Chamberlain, SA
   Elhaik, E
   Jalli, I
   Lynes, AR
   Marczak, L
   Sabath, N
   Vargas, A
   Wieski, K
   Zelig, EM
   Pennings, SC
AF Guo, Hongyu
   Chamberlain, Scott A.
   Elhaik, Eran
   Jalli, Inder
   Lynes, Alana-Rose
   Marczak, Laurie
   Sabath, Niv
   Vargas, Amy
   Wieski, Kazimierz
   Zelig, Emily M.
   Pennings, Steven C.
TI Geographic Variation in Plant Community Structure of Salt Marshes:
   Species, Functional and Phylogenetic Perspectives
SO PLOS ONE
DT Article
ID GULF-OF-MEXICO; DISTANCE-DECAY; BETA-DIVERSITY; EVOLUTIONARY PROCESSES;
   AMAZONIAN FOREST; FRESH-WATER; SIMILARITY; ECOLOGY; ZONATION; TRAITS
AB In general, community similarity is thought to decay with distance; however, this view may be complicated by the relative roles of different ecological processes at different geographical scales, and by the compositional perspective (e.g. species, functional group and phylogenetic lineage) used. Coastal salt marshes are widely distributed worldwide, but no studies have explicitly examined variation in salt marsh plant community composition across geographical scales, and from species, functional and phylogenetic perspectives. Based on studies in other ecosystems, we hypothesized that, in coastal salt marshes, community turnover would be more rapid at local versus larger geographical scales; and that community turnover patterns would diverge among compositional perspectives, with a greater distance decay at the species level than at the functional or phylogenetic levels. We tested these hypotheses in salt marshes of two regions: The southern Atlantic and Gulf Coasts of the United States. We examined the characteristics of plant community composition at each salt marsh site, how community similarity decayed with distance within individual salt marshes versus among sites in each region, and how community similarity differed among regions, using species, functional and phylogenetic perspectives. We found that results from the three compositional perspectives generally showed similar patterns: there was strong variation in community composition within individual salt marsh sites across elevation; in contrast, community similarity decayed with distance four to five orders of magnitude more slowly across sites within each region. Overall, community dissimilarity of salt marshes was lowest on the southern Atlantic Coast, intermediate on the Gulf Coast, and highest between the two regions. Our results indicated that local gradients are relatively more important than regional processes in structuring coastal salt marsh communities. Our results also suggested that in ecosystems with low species diversity, functional and phylogenetic approaches may not provide additional insight over a species-based approach.
RI Pennings, Steven/A-8326-2013
OI Pennings, Steven/0000-0003-4757-7125
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 1932-6203
PD MAY 26
PY 2015
VL 10
IS 5
AR e0127781
DI 10.1371/journal.pone.0127781
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000355183900144
PM 26010135
ER

PT J
AU Kaur, K
   Bakke, MJ
   Nilsen, F
   Horsberg, TE
AF Kaur, Kiranpreet
   Bakke, Marit Jorgensen
   Nilsen, Frank
   Horsberg, Tor Einar
TI Identification and Molecular Characterization of Two
   Acetylcholinesterases from the Salmon Louse, Lepeophtheirus salmonis
SO PLOS ONE
DT Article
ID CDNA-ENCODING ACETYLCHOLINESTERASE; MOSQUITO CULEX-PIPIENS;
   DROSOPHILA-MELANOGASTER; INSECTICIDE RESISTANCE; INSENSITIVE
   ACETYLCHOLINESTERASE; BLATTELLA-GERMANICA; POINT MUTATIONS; GENE;
   COCKROACH; DIPTERA
AB Acetylcholinesterase (AChE) is an important enzyme in cholinergic synapses. Most arthropods have two genes (ace1 and ace2), but only one encodes the predominant synaptic AChE, the main target for organophosphates. Resistance towards organophosphates is widespread in the marine arthropod Lepeophtheirus salmonis. To understand this trait, it is essential to characterize the gene(s) coding for AChE(s). The full length cDNA sequences encoding two AChEs in Lepeophtheirus salmonis were molecularly characterized in this study. The two ace genes were highly similar (83.5% similarity at protein level). Alignment to the Lepeophtheirus salmonis genome revealed that both genes were located close to each other (separated by just 26.4 kbp on the Lepeophtheirus salmonis genome), resulting from a recent gene duplication. Both proteins had all the typical features of functional AChE and clustered together with AChE-type 1 proteins in other species, an observation that has not been described in other arthropods. We therefore concluded the presence of two versions of ace1 gene in Lepeophtheirus salmonis, named ace1a and ace1b. Ace1a was predominantly expressed in different developmental stages compared to ace1b and was possibly active in the cephalothorax, indicating that ace1a is more likely to play the major role in cholinergic synaptic transmission. The study is essential to understand the role of AChEs in resistance against organophosphates in Lepeophtheirus salmonis.
RI Kaur, Kiran/R-3535-2018
OI Kaur, Kiran/0000-0002-7285-5513
TC 7
Z9 9
SN 1932-6203
PD MAY 4
PY 2015
VL 10
IS 5
AR e0125362
DI 10.1371/journal.pone.0125362
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000353943000061
PM 25938836
ER

PT J
AU Dastager, SG
   Mawlankar, R
   Sonalkar, VV
   Thorat, MN
   Mual, P
   Verma, A
   Krishnamurthi, S
   Tang, SK
   Li, WJ
AF Dastager, Syed G.
   Mawlankar, Rahul
   Sonalkar, Vidya V.
   Thorat, Meghana N.
   Mual, Poonam
   Verma, Ashish
   Krishnamurthi, Srinivasan
   Tang, Shan-Kun
   Li, Wen-Jun
TI Exiguobacterium enclense sp nov., isolated from sediment
SO INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF SYSTEMATIC AND EVOLUTIONARY MICROBIOLOGY
DT Article
ID DEOXYRIBONUCLEIC-ACID; GENUS EXIGUOBACTERIUM; BACTERIUM; MEMBER;
   TEMPERATURE; SEQUENCES; CHINA; TREES; RATES; SEA
AB A Gram-stain-positive bacterium, designated strain NIO-1109(T), was isolated from a marine sediment sample from Chorao Island, Goa, India. Phenotypic and chemotaxonomic characteristics and data from phylogenetic analysis based on 16S rRNA gene sequences indicated that strain NIO-1109(T) was related to the genus Exiguobacterium. Strain NIO-1109(T) exhibited >98.0% 16S rRNA gene sequence similarity with respect to Exiguobacterium indicum HHS 31(T) (99.5%) and Exiguobacterium acetylicum NCIMB 9889(T) (99.1 %); the type strains of other species showed <98% similarity. Levels of DNA DNA relatedness between strain NIO-1109(T) and E. acetylicum DSM 20416(T) and E indicum LMG 23471(T) were less than 70% (33.0 +/- 2.0 and 37 +/- 32%, respectively). Strain NIO-1109(T) also differed from these two closely related species in a number of phenotypic traits. Based on phenotypic, chemotaxonomic and phylogenetic data, strain NIO-1109(T) is considered to represent a novel species of the genus Exiguobacterium, for which the name Exiguobacterium enclense sp. nov. is proposed. The type strain is NIO-1109(T) (=NCIM 5457(T)= DSM 25128(T)=CCTCC AB 2011124(T)).
RI VERMA, ASHISH/M-4832-2017
OI VERMA, ASHISH/0000-0001-9734-5766; Dastager, Syed/0000-0002-8316-1242
TC 5
Z9 5
SN 1466-5026
EI 1466-5034
PD MAY
PY 2015
VL 65
BP 1611
EP 1616
DI 10.1099/ijs.0.000149
PN 5
SC Microbiology
UT WOS:000361075900038
PM 25716950
ER

PT J
AU Whatley, MH
   Vonk, JA
   van der Geest, HG
   Admiraal, W
AF Whatley, Merrin H.
   Vonk, J. Arie
   van der Geest, Harm G.
   Admiraal, Wim
TI Temporal abiotic variability structures invertebrate communities in
   agricultural drainage ditches
SO LIMNOLOGICA
DT Article
DE Temporal abiotic variability; Aquatic invertebrates; Diversity;
   Life-history strategies; Agricultural drainage ditches
ID FRESH-WATER MACROINVERTEBRATES; LIFE-HISTORY STRATEGIES; SPECIES TRAITS;
   FINE SEDIMENT; EUTROPHICATION; NETHERLANDS; ENVIRONMENT; LANDSCAPES;
   DIVERSITY; ECOLOGY
AB Abiotic variability is known to structure lotic invertebrate communities, yet its influence on lentic invertebrates is not clear. This study tests the hypothesis that variability of nutrients and macro-ions are structuring invertebrate communities in agricultural drainage ditches. This was determined by investigating invertebrate adaptations to disturbance using insect life-history strategies. Many low-lying agricultural areas contain drainage ditches which potentially provide suitable habitat for aquatic invertebrates. In the province of North Holland (The Netherlands) the extensive network of eutrophic ditches are hydrologically managed, creating seasonal variability of water quality arising from agricultural run-off and the inlet of mineral rich, river derived water. This temporal variability was analysed from monitoring data, collected over a 7 month period (February till August) and covering 84 ditches in three soil regions; sand, clay and peat. Invertebrate diversity was determined as local (alpha diversity), regional (gamma diversity) and species-turnover (beta diversity). We ran canonical correspondence analysis and linear mixed models to determine correlations between invertebrate diversity, functional community composition and specific abiotic parameters, including variability (expressed as the Median Absolute Deviation). Invertebrate a diversity was positively correlated to variability in water transparency and negatively correlated to average pH, with the two parameters reflecting a water quality gradient in the environment. Insect life-history strategies expressed adaptations to abiotic variability and harsh (eutrophic) conditions. These adaptations were mainly achieved through good dispersal abilities and developmental trade-offs. The results support measures to reduce influxes of excess nutrients to this network of ditches. (C) 2015 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.
RI Vonk, Jan Arie/B-1105-2009
OI Vonk, Jan Arie/0000-0002-8803-1148
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 0075-9511
EI 1873-5851
PD MAY
PY 2015
VL 52
BP 20
EP 29
DI 10.1016/j.limno.2015.03.001
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000357354600003
ER

PT J
AU Farre, M
   Lombarte, A
   Recasens, L
   Maynou, F
   Tuset, VM
AF Farre, Marc
   Lombarte, Antoni
   Recasens, Laura
   Maynou, Francesc
   Tuset, Victor M.
TI Habitat influence in the morphological diversity of coastal fish
   assemblages
SO JOURNAL OF SEA RESEARCH
DT Article
DE Morphology; Ecological structure; Environmental factors; Fish
   assemblages; Morphospace; Mediterranean Sea
ID MARINE PROTECTED AREA; WESTERN MEDITERRANEAN SEA; BODY SHAPE VARIATION;
   FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; CONTINENTAL-SHELF; ROCKY REEFS; ENVIRONMENTAL
   VARIATION; LABRID FISHES; LAKE MALAWI; PATTERNS
AB Ecological diversity based on quantitative data is widely used to characterize biological communities, but recently morphological and functional traits have also been used to analyse the structure of fish assemblages. This diversity and structure is usually linked to variables such as habitat complexity and composition, depth, and spatial and temporal variations. In this study, several fish assemblages off the Catalan coast (NW Mediterranean) were ecologically and morphologically analysed and compared. The morphological analysis was performed from body shape of fish species using geometric morphology. Moreover, a canonical correspondence analysis (CCA) was used to analyse the effect of local environmental variables such as habitat, locality and depth on the composition and abundance of assemblages. The results revealed greater differences among assemblages in the clustering performed from morphological data, which is linked to habitat complexity, than those shown by the ecological analysis. Moreover, the CCA analysis indicated that type of substratum and the location significantly influenced the composition and structure of the fish assemblages. These results evidenced that morphology provides different and complementary information than ecological analysis because it allows to predict the ecological and functional habits of species within the community, helping to improve the understanding of the fish assemblages structure. (C) 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
RI Recasens, Laura/K-5395-2013; Lombarte, Antoni/D-3142-2013; Tuset,
   Victor/A-9132-2019
OI Recasens, Laura/0000-0002-2821-1796; Tuset, Victor/0000-0001-9032-2844;
   Lombarte, Antoni/0000-0001-5215-4587; Maynou,
   Francesc/0000-0001-7200-6485; Farre, Marc/0000-0002-2263-4800
TC 9
Z9 9
SN 1385-1101
EI 1873-1414
PD MAY
PY 2015
VL 99
BP 107
EP 117
DI 10.1016/j.seares.2015.03.002
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000356980100012
ER

PT J
AU Shubina, EA
   Ponomareva, EV
   Klimov, AV
   Klimova, AV
   Kedrova, OS
AF Shubina, E. A.
   Ponomareva, E. V.
   Klimov, A. V.
   Klimova, A. V.
   Kedrova, O. S.
TI Repetitive DNA sequences as an indicator of the level of genetic
   isolation in fish
SO MOLECULAR BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE DNA tandem repeats; microsatellite and multilocus analyses; fish;
   genetic isolation; speciation
ID RESTRICTION-ENDONUCLEASE ANALYSIS; SATELLITE DNA; KURIL ISLANDS;
   RETICULATE EVOLUTION; CONCERTED EVOLUTION; MOLECULAR DRIVE; ALLOZYME
   DATA; SALMONIDAE; SYSTEMATICS; DIVERGENCE
AB Although the functional role is still unknown for most types of nuclear noncoding repetitive sequences, some of them proved to provide adequate phylogenetic and taxonomic markers for studying the genetic relationships of organisms at the species and within-species levels. Several markers were used in this work. First, microsatellite markers were used to examine populations varying in the extent of genetic subdivision in marine and anadromous fish, including the Chilean jack mackerel Trachurus murphyi, anadromous brown trout Salmo trutta, and isolated and anadromous char populations. Locus polymorphism was proportional to the gene flow between populations in all cases. Second, satellite DNA was used to study the phylogenetic relationships within the genera Salmo, Oncorhynchus, Salvelinus, and Coregonus. Genetic distances agreed well with the taxonomic relationships based on morphological traits and various biochemical markers and correlated with the evolutionary ages estimated for the groups by other markers. Third, RAPD PCR with a set of 20-mer primers was performed to study the genus Coregonus and anadromous and isolated populations and species of the genus Salvelinus. The resulting phylogenetic trees may help to resolve some disputable taxonomic issues for the groups. A comparison showed that several RAPD-detected sequences contain conserved fragments of coding sequences and polymorphic repeats (minisatellites) from intergenic regions or introns. The finding point to a nonrandom nature of repetitive DNA divergence and may reflect the evolution of the fish groups examined. Heterochromatic satellite repeats were assumed to contribute to generating a reproductive barrier.
RI Klimova, Anna/Q-8473-2016
OI Klimova, Anna/0000-0003-1527-0954
TC 0
Z9 1
SN 0026-8933
EI 1608-3245
PD MAY
PY 2015
VL 49
IS 3
BP 358
EP 368
DI 10.1134/S0026893315030152
SC Biochemistry & Molecular Biology
UT WOS:000356371700004
ER

PT J
AU Sailley, SF
   Polimene, L
   Mitra, A
   Atkinson, A
   Allen, JI
AF Sailley, Sevrine F.
   Polimene, Luca
   Mitra, Aditee
   Atkinson, Angus
   Allen, J. Icarus
TI Impact of zooplankton food selectivity on plankton dynamics and nutrient
   cycling
SO JOURNAL OF PLANKTON RESEARCH
DT Article
DE feeding behavior; prey selection; plankton dynamics; zooplankton;
   stoichiometry
ID PREDATOR-PREY INTERACTIONS; MARINE ECOSYSTEM MODEL; FUNCTIONAL-RESPONSE;
   ANTARCTIC KRILL; OXYRRHIS-MARINA; COPEPODS; STOICHIOMETRY;
   MESOZOOPLANKTON; CAPABILITIES; ABSORPTION
AB Within models, zooplankton grazing is typically defined as being dependent on total prey concentration, with feeding selectivity expressed only as a function of prey size. This behavior ignores taxonomic preferences shown by the predators and the capacity of some zooplankton to actively select or reject individual prey items from mixtures. We carried out two model experiments comparing impacts of zooplankton displaying passive and active selection, which resulted in contrasting dynamics for the pelagic system. Passive selection by the grazer resulted in a top down control on the prey with a fast turn-over of nutrients. Active selection, on the other hand led to a bottom-up control, with slower nutrient turnover constraining primary production by changing the system toward export of particulate matter. Our results suggest that selective feeding behavior is an important trait, and should be considered alongside size and taxonomy when studying the role of zooplankton impact in the ecosystem.
OI Mitra, Aditee/0000-0001-5572-9331
TC 12
Z9 12
SN 0142-7873
EI 1464-3774
PD MAY-JUN
PY 2015
VL 37
IS 3
BP 519
EP 529
DI 10.1093/plankt/fbv020
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000356039200004
ER

PT J
AU Leisler, B
   Winkler, H
AF Leisler, Bernd
   Winkler, Hans
TI Evolution of island warblers: beyond bills and masses
SO JOURNAL OF AVIAN BIOLOGY
DT Article
ID REED-WARBLERS; BODY-SIZE; RULE; BIRDS; BEHAVIOR; PACIFIC; POPULATIONS;
   REGRESSION; MORPHOLOGY; DIVERSIFICATION
AB In this paper, we take a closer look into the evolution of Acrocephalus warblers on islands in the Atlantic, Indian and Pacific Oceans. The shape-related morphological evolution of island species is characterized by changes in the hind limb, flight, and feeding apparatus. Birds on islands converged to a morphology with strong legs, shorter rictal bristles, and rounder, more slotted and broader wings. Because of their high variance among islands, body size and bill dimensions did not contribute to the separation of continental and island forms, although bills tend to be longer on islands. The wings of island birds hardly vary among islands, unsurprisingly due to a lack of the adaptive features associated with long distance flights. The tendency towards shorter rictal bristles in the island warblers can be explained by the diminished role of aerial feeding, and closer contact with various substrates in the course of extractive foraging. The shift towards stronger legs in several insular species is remarkable because reed warblers on continents have even stronger legs than other passerines of comparable size. This trait correlates with diverse, acrobatic feeding techniques that are typically associated with broad habitat use. Bills reach extreme lengths on some islands. However, short bills occur as frequently, rendering this character highly variable among islands. Short bills indicate gleaning feeding techniques, whereas long bills are typical for species that pursue hidden and difficult-to-access prey. Body sizes differ greatly from island to island. On average, the sizes of island birds do not differ from continental ones, however. We suggest that vegetation clutter is the major driving force for this variation. The main conclusion following from our results is that evolution on islands pertains to all functional complexes, and not only the hitherto studied body size and bill dimensions.
TC 7
Z9 8
SN 0908-8857
EI 1600-048X
PD MAY
PY 2015
VL 46
IS 3
BP 236
EP 244
DI 10.1111/jav.00509
SC Zoology
UT WOS:000355622400002
ER

PT J
AU Goncalves-Souza, T
   Santos, AJ
   Romero, GQ
   Lewinsohn, TM
AF Goncalves-Souza, Thiago
   Santos, Adalberto J.
   Romero, Gustavo Q.
   Lewinsohn, Thomas M.
TI Conservation along a hotspot rim: spiders in Brazilian coastal restingas
SO BIODIVERSITY AND CONSERVATION
DT Article
DE Biodiversity facets; Conservation prioritization; Hotspots; Coastal
   ecosystems
ID FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY INDEXES; ATLANTIC FOREST; PHYLOGENETIC DIVERSITY;
   TAXONOMIC DISTINCTNESS; BIODIVERSITY HOTSPOTS; ARANEAE SALTICIDAE;
   RELATIVES ARANEAE; LINYPHIID SPIDERS; SPECIES RICHNESS; GLOBAL HOTSPOTS
AB Protected areas are essential for the maintenance of biodiversity, but defining criteria for prioritizing areas to conserve is not an easy task. In general, selection has been based on species richness and endemism of plants and vertebrates; however, these do not necessarily match invertebrate data, hence the need of using other groups in conservation prioritization. Moreover, species richness represents one of several biodiversity facets and does not subsume other facets such as functional and phylogenetic diversity. Restingas are coastal ecosystems within the Atlantic Forest biome, one of the World's biodiversity hotspots. We investigated whether there is congruence between three different spider biodiversity facets: functional (FD, the variety of functional traits of species), phylogenetic (PD, the evolutionary distinctness of species), and taxonomic (TD, the number and the relative abundance of species), and whether currently protected restingas are effective in protecting these facets. We studied vegetation-living spider communities in 11 restingas along 2,000 km of the Brazilian coast. We found that no value of any biodiversity facet was higher in protected restingas compared with unprotected ones. We demonstrated low congruence between the three biodiversity facets, so that the use of TD as a surrogate of other facets is unwarranted. Whilst some protected restingas hold high values of spider TD, other still unprotected areas present high PD or FD. This result suggests that conservation efforts should be extended to every remaining restinga because they are unique sites to at least one spider biodiversity facet. In particular, we recommend three unprotected restingas as high priorities in future conservation plans based on spider diversity, which corroborate findings for plants and vertebrates in the same sites.
RI Santos, Adalberto/H-8349-2012; Goncalves Souza, Thiago/E-3813-2012;
   Lewinsohn, Thomas/D-5880-2012; Romero, Gustavo/H-8974-2012
OI Santos, Adalberto/0000-0002-0010-346X; Goncalves Souza,
   Thiago/0000-0001-8471-7479; Lewinsohn, Thomas/0000-0001-5950-5343;
   Romero, Gustavo/0000-0003-3736-4759
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 0960-3115
EI 1572-9710
PD MAY
PY 2015
VL 24
IS 5
BP 1131
EP 1146
DI 10.1007/s10531-014-0846-8
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000353888600007
ER

PT J
AU Beier, S
   Rivers, AR
   Moran, MA
   Obernosterer, I
AF Beier, Sara
   Rivers, Adam R.
   Moran, Mary Ann
   Obernosterer, Ingrid
TI Phenotypic plasticity in heterotrophic marine microbial communities in
   continuous cultures
SO ISME JOURNAL
DT Article
ID ENVIRONMENT; BIODIVERSITY; DIVERSITY; SEQUENCE; SEARCH; BLAST
AB Phenotypic plasticity (PP) is the development of alternate phenotypes of a given taxon as an adaptation to environmental conditions. Methodological limitations have restricted the quantification of PP to the measurement of a few traits in single organisms. We used metatranscriptomic libraries to overcome these challenges and estimate PP using the expressed genes of multiple heterotrophic organisms as a proxy for traits in a microbial community. The metatranscriptomes captured the expression response of natural marine bacterial communities grown on differing carbon resource regimes in continuous cultures. We found that taxa with different magnitudes of PP coexisted in the same cultures, and that members of the order Rhodobacterales had the highest levels of PP. In agreement with previous studies, our results suggest that continuous culturing may have specifically selected for taxa featuring a rather high range of PP. On average, PP and abundance changes within a taxon contributed equally to the organism's change in functional gene abundance, implying that both PP and abundance mediated observed differences in community function. However, not all functional changes due to PP were directly reflected in the bulk community functional response: gene expression changes in individual taxa due to PP were partly masked by counterbalanced expression of the same gene in other taxa. This observation demonstrates that PP had a stabilizing effect on a community's functional response to environmental change.
RI Obernosterer, Ingrid/A-5434-2011; Beier, Sara/K-7267-2012
OI Obernosterer, Ingrid/0000-0002-2530-8111; Beier,
   Sara/0000-0003-3707-4487; Rivers, Adam/0000-0002-3703-834X; Moran, Mary
   Ann/0000-0002-0702-8167
TC 6
Z9 6
SN 1751-7362
EI 1751-7370
PD MAY
PY 2015
VL 9
IS 5
BP 1141
EP 1151
DI 10.1038/ismej.2014.206
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Microbiology
UT WOS:000353354100008
PM 25397947
ER

PT J
AU Batriu, E
   Ninot, JM
   Pino, J
AF Batriu, Efrem
   Maria Ninot, Josep
   Pino, Joan
TI Filtering of plant functional traits is determined by environmental
   gradients and by past land use in a Mediterranean coastal marsh
SO JOURNAL OF VEGETATION SCIENCE
DT Article
DE coastal marshes; past land use; plant functional traits; RLQ; salinity;
   waterlogging
ID LIFE-HISTORY TRAITS; DNA-SEQUENCE DATA; SALT MARSHES; SPECIES TRAITS;
   PHYLOGENETIC-RELATIONSHIPS; MOLECULAR PHYLOGENY; COMMUNITY STRUCTURE;
   C-4 PHOTOSYNTHESIS; EXTINCTION DEBT; DELTA CATALONIA
AB QuestionWhat is the effect of past land use and environmental gradients on plant functional traits within coastal marsh plant communities?
   LocationMediterranean microtidal marshes in the Llobregat Delta, NE Spain.
   MethodsWe used a data set collected previously comprising 45 vegetation plots with associated soil parameters, water table conditions and past land use. For each species we obtained the values or states for a set of plant functional traits: plant height, leaf dry matter content, specific leaf area, seed production, seed weight, life form and lateral expansion. To account for the effect of phylogeny, we evaluated trait diversity skewness by means of an ultrametric phylogenetic tree specifically constructed for the species studied. The association between both environmental gradients and past disturbance, and plant functional traits was tested by means of RLQ analysis.
   ResultsOf all the traits, only seed weight showed a phylogenetic signal; consequently, phylogeny was not included in the RLQ analysis. Conductivity was negatively correlated with seed weight, whereas water table conditions and soil ionic balance were negatively correlated with specific leaf area. Past disturbance was negatively correlated with leaf dry matter content and with lateral expansion.
   ConclusionsPlant traits of Llobregat Delta coastal marsh communities are conditioned by environmental gradients and by past land use. Soil ionic balance and water table conditions determine key plant functional traits such as specific leaf area. This finding also corroborates the importance of soil ionic balance as a plant life driver in microtidal Mediterranean marshes. The effect of past land use on species traits might, however, be partially indirect and mediated by associated environmental changes.
RI Pino, Joan/H-6253-2015
OI Pino, Joan/0000-0003-0939-7502
TC 3
Z9 4
SN 1100-9233
EI 1654-1103
PD MAY
PY 2015
VL 26
IS 3
BP 492
EP 500
DI 10.1111/jvs.12251
SC Plant Sciences; Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Forestry
UT WOS:000352793500009
ER

PT J
AU Barnes, RSK
   Hendy, IW
AF Barnes, R. S. K.
   Hendy, Ian W.
TI Functional uniformity underlies the common spatial structure of
   macrofaunal assemblages in intertidal seagrass beds
SO BIOLOGICAL JOURNAL OF THE LINNEAN SOCIETY
DT Article
DE biodiversity; biological traits; functional diversity; macrobenthos;
   seagrass; spatial occurrence patterns
ID SPECIES ABUNDANCE DISTRIBUTIONS; MARINE BENTHIC ECOSYSTEMS; DIVERSITY;
   BIODIVERSITY; COMMUNITY; REDUNDANCY; TRAITS; SEDIMENT; CONSERVATION;
   PATTERNS
AB Previous work has shown that the intertidal seagrass macrobenthos at three geographically and ecologically disparate localities (in the north-east Atlantic, south-west Indian and south-west Pacific Oceans) possess similar relative species occurrence distributions and uniform species densities. These common features are here demonstrated to be related to the presence in those assemblages of: (1) similar functional diversities and evennesses, (2) the same set of dominant component functional groups, and (3) similar ranked relative occurrence distributions both of those groups and of the component genera within each of the larger groups. The two lower-latitude systems were particularly similar in all these respects. Although sharing the same subset of individual functional groups, however, the relative importance of members of that subset varied from locality to locality and even within a single locality, whilst still maintaining the same ranked relative functional-group occurrence distribution. Therefore the broad structure of available macrobenthic functional roles and the relative occurrences of the component taxa in intertidal seagrass beds (and hence, granted stochastic assembly, the total numbers of taxa supported by unit area) are likely to be linked causally, although the form of the relationship is unclear.(c) 2015 The Linnean Society of London, Biological Journal of the Linnean Society, 2015, 115, 114-126.
OI Barnes, Richard/0000-0002-5773-5994
TC 7
Z9 7
SN 0024-4066
EI 1095-8312
PD MAY
PY 2015
VL 115
IS 1
BP 114
EP 126
DI 10.1111/bij.12483
SC Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000352630300010
ER

PT J
AU Kandalepas, D
   Blum, MJ
   Van Bael, SA
AF Kandalepas, Demetra
   Blum, Michael J.
   Van Bael, Sunshine A.
TI Shifts in Symbiotic Endophyte Communities of a Foundational Salt Marsh
   Grass following Oil Exposure from the Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill
SO PLOS ONE
DT Article
ID GULF-OF-MEXICO; TROPICAL FUNGAL ENDOPHYTES; PLANT FUNCTIONAL TRAITS;
   BACILLUS-PUMILUS; OCEAN ACIDIFICATION; BIODIVERSITY LOSS; DIVERSITY;
   STRESS; MICROORGANISMS; EVOLUTION
AB Symbiotic associations can be disrupted by disturbance or by changing environmental conditions. Endophytes are fungal and bacterial symbionts of plants that can affect performance. As in more widely known symbioses, acute or chronic stressor exposure might trigger disassociation of endophytes from host plants. We tested this hypothesis by examining the effects of oil exposure following the Deepwater Horizon (DWH) oil spill on endophyte diversity and abundance in Spartina alterniflora - the foundational plant in northern Gulf coast salt marshes affected by the spill. We compared bacterial and fungal endophytes isolated from plants in reference areas to isolates from plants collected in areas with residual oil that has persisted for more than three years after the DWH spill. DNA sequence-based estimates showed that oil exposure shifted endophyte diversity and community structure. Plants from oiled areas exhibited near total loss of leaf fungal endophytes. Root fungal endophytes exhibited a more modest decline and little change was observed in endophytic bacterial diversity or abundance, though a shift towards hydrocarbon metabolizers was found in plants from oiled sites. These results show that plant-endophyte symbioses can be disrupted by stressor exposure, and indicate that symbiont community disassembly in marsh plants is an enduring outcome of the DWH spill.
TC 11
Z9 11
SN 1932-6203
PD APR 29
PY 2015
VL 10
IS 4
AR e0122378
DI 10.1371/journal.pone.0122378
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000353711600012
PM 25923203
ER

PT J
AU Altenburger, R
   Ait-Aissa, S
   Antczak, P
   Backhaus, T
   Barcelo, D
   Seiler, TB
   Brion, F
   Busch, W
   Chipman, K
   de Alda, ML
   Umbuzeiro, GDA
   Escher, BI
   Falciani, F
   Faust, M
   Focks, A
   Hilscherova, K
   Hollender, J
   Hollert, H
   Jager, F
   Jahnke, A
   Kortenkamp, A
   Krauss, M
   Lemkine, GF
   Munthe, J
   Neumann, S
   Schymanski, EL
   Scrimshaw, M
   Segner, H
   Slobodnik, J
   Smedes, F
   Kughathas, S
   Teodorovic, I
   Tindall, AJ
   Tollefsen, KE
   Walz, KH
   Williams, TD
   Van den Brink, PJ
   van Gils, J
   Vrana, B
   Zhang, XW
   Brack, W
AF Altenburger, Rolf
   Ait-Aissa, Selim
   Antczak, Philipp
   Backhaus, Thomas
   Barcelo, Damia
   Seiler, Thomas-Benjamin
   Brion, Francois
   Busch, Wibke
   Chipman, Kevin
   Lopez de Alda, Miren
   de Aragao Umbuzeiro, Gisela
   Escher, Beate I.
   Falciani, Francesco
   Faust, Michael
   Focks, Andreas
   Hilscherova, Klara
   Hollender, Juliane
   Hollert, Henner
   Jaeger, Felix
   Jahnke, Annika
   Kortenkamp, Andreas
   Krauss, Martin
   Lemkine, Gregory F.
   Munthe, John
   Neumann, Steffen
   Schymanski, Emma L.
   Scrimshaw, Mark
   Segner, Helmut
   Slobodnik, Jaroslav
   Smedes, Foppe
   Kughathas, Subramaniarn
   Teodorovic, Ivana
   Tindall, Andrew J.
   Tollefsen, Knut Erik
   Walz, Karl-Heinz
   Williams, Tim D.
   Van den Brink, Paul J.
   van Gils, Jos
   Vrana, Branislav
   Zhang, Xiaowei
   Brack, Werner
TI Future water quality monitoring - Adapting tools to deal with mixtures
   of pollutants in water resource management
SO SCIENCE OF THE TOTAL ENVIRONMENT
DT Article
DE WFD; Water quality; Priority chemicals; Chemical status; Effect-based
   tools; Ecological status; Mixture toxicity
ID EFFECT-DIRECTED ANALYSIS; ENVIRONMENTAL RISK-ASSESSMENT; TANDEM
   MASS-SPECTROMETRY; COMMUNITY TOLERANCE PICT; WASTE-WATER; ESTROGENIC
   COMPOUNDS; SURFACE WATERS; CONCEPTUAL-FRAMEWORK; ORGANIC-CHEMICALS;
   ZEBRAFISH EMBRYOS
AB Environmental quality monitoring of water resources is challenged with providing the basis for safeguarding the environment against adverse biological effects of anthropogenic chemical contamination from diffuse and point sources. While current regulatory efforts focus on monitoring and assessing a few legacy chemicals, many more anthropogenic chemicals can be detected simultaneously in our aquatic resources. However, exposure to chemical mixtures does not necessarily translate into adverse biological effects nor clearly shows whether mitigation measures are needed. Thus, the question which mixtures are present and which have associated combined effects becomes central for defining adequate monitoring and assessment strategies. Here we describe the vision of the international, EU-funded project SOLUTIONS, where three routes are explored to link the occurrence of chemical mixtures at specific sites to the assessment of adverse biological combination effects. First of all, multi-residue target and non-target screening techniques covering a broader range of anticipated chemicals co-occurring in the environment are being developed. By improving sensitivity and detection limits for known bioactive compounds of concern, new analytical chemistry data for multiple components can be obtained and used to characterise priority mixtures. This information on chemical occurrence will be used to predict mixture toxicity and to derive combined effect estimates suitable for advancing environmental quality standards. Secondly, bioanalytical tools will be explored to provide aggregate bioactivity measures integrating all components that produce common (adverse) outcomes even for mixtures of varying compositions. The ambition is to provide comprehensive arrays of effect-based tools and trait-based field observations that link multiple chemical exposures to various environmental protection goals more directly and to provide improved in situ observations for impact assessment of mixtures. Thirdly, effect-directed analysis (EDA) will be applied to identify major drivers of mixture toxicity. Refinements of EDA include the use of statistical approaches with monitoring information for guidance of experimental EDA studies. These three approaches will be explored using case studies at the Danube and Rhine river basins as well as rivers of the Iberian Peninsula. The synthesis of findings will be organised to provide guidance for future solution-oriented environmental monitoring and explore more systematic ways to assess mixture exposures and combination effects in future water quality monitoring. (C) 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
RI Busch, Wibke/I-9348-2012; Umbuzeiro, Gisela/H-4603-2011; INERIS,
   Ineris/B-5682-2009; Hollert, Henner/A-1027-2009; Jahnke,
   Annika/D-4528-2013; Smedes, Foppe/E-1434-2012; Zhang,
   Xiaowei/I-2259-2012; Hilscherova, Klara/B-4595-2011; Lemkine,
   Gregory/O-3279-2016; Lopez de Alda, Miren/E-3357-2014; Hollender,
   Juliane/A-2145-2014; AIT-AISSA, Selim/Q-8702-2018; Seiler,
   Thomas-Benjamin/K-6294-2012; Escher, Beate/C-7992-2009; BRION,
   Francois/Q-8713-2018; Focks, Andreas/O-1186-2015; Krauss,
   Martin/E-1672-2012
OI Umbuzeiro, Gisela/0000-0002-8623-5200; Hollert,
   Henner/0000-0001-5776-5619; Smedes, Foppe/0000-0002-1018-0063; Zhang,
   Xiaowei/0000-0001-8974-9963; Hilscherova, Klara/0000-0001-6320-8093;
   Lopez de Alda, Miren/0000-0002-9347-2765; Hollender,
   Juliane/0000-0002-4660-274X; AIT-AISSA, Selim/0000-0001-7817-1932;
   Seiler, Thomas-Benjamin/0000-0001-8127-510X; Escher,
   Beate/0000-0002-5304-706X; BRION, Francois/0000-0003-2341-4196; Focks,
   Andreas/0000-0002-9031-0808; Krauss, Martin/0000-0002-0362-4244;
   Williams, Timothy/0000-0002-5857-3851; Vrana,
   Branislav/0000-0003-4221-5774; Backhaus, Thomas/0000-0001-9643-1662;
   Brack, Werner/0000-0001-9269-6524; van den brink,
   Paul/0000-0002-7241-4347; Tindall, Andrew/0000-0001-8119-0923;
   Scrimshaw, Mark/0000-0001-9965-786X
TC 97
Z9 99
SN 0048-9697
EI 1879-1026
PD APR 15
PY 2015
VL 512
BP 540
EP 551
DI 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2014.12.057
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000351248500054
PM 25644849
ER

PT J
AU de Juan, S
   Hewitt, J
   Thrush, S
   Freeman, D
AF de Juan, Silvia
   Hewitt, Judi
   Thrush, Simon
   Freeman, Debbie
TI Standardising the assessment of Functional Integrity in benthic
   ecosystems
SO JOURNAL OF SEA RESEARCH
DT Article
DE Ecosystem integrity; Functional components; Functional diversity;
   Habitat complexity; Video survey; Benthic communities
ID ECOLOGICAL INTEGRITY; TRAWLING DISTURBANCE; MARINE BIODIVERSITY;
   INTERACTION NETWORKS; BIOLOGICAL TRAITS; HABITAT STRUCTURE; DIVERSITY;
   COMMUNITIES; INDICATORS; SEDIMENT
AB Ecological integrity is an overarching concept that integrates multiple properties of ecosystems, including structure, function and resilience to external change. We explore the links between ecological integrity and structural surrogates for ecosystem functioning to develop a cost-effective assessment of Functional Integrity for marine habitats based on biological traits, abundance and heterogeneity, focused on the visible components of the sea-floor, i.e., epibenthic flora and fauna and seabed biogenic habitat features. The assessment was based on diversity and redundancy of functional traits of the identified benthic components, supplemented by estimates of spatial heterogeneity (habitat transitions) and vertical habitat complexity. This approach was developed using video data collected in different years with different sampling strategies in two locations: Kawau Bay in North Island of New Zealand, and Port Pegasus in Stewart Island, off South Island of New Zealand; this last location was a priori expected to be nearly pristine. Despite variability in sampling techniques and environmental settings, the approach proved effective and evidenced higher measures of Functional Integrity in the Port Pegasus location. This study introduces a first step to measure ecological integrity by successfully converting video data to surrogates of Functional Integrity, in a way expected to be habitat independent. (C) 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
RI de Juan, Silvia/M-2553-2014
OI de Juan, Silvia/0000-0002-8891-8371; Thrush, Simon/0000-0002-4005-3882
TC 5
Z9 5
SN 1385-1101
EI 1873-1414
PD APR
PY 2015
VL 98
BP 33
EP 41
DI 10.1016/j.seares.2014.06.001
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000357146900005
ER

PT J
AU Tornroos, A
   Bonsdorff, E
   Bremner, J
   Blomqvist, M
   Josefson, AB
   Garcia, C
   Warzocha, J
AF Tornroos, Anna
   Bonsdorff, Erik
   Bremner, Julie
   Blomqvist, Mats
   Josefson, Alf B.
   Garcia, Clement
   Warzocha, Jan
TI Marine benthic ecological functioning over decreasing taxonomic richness
SO JOURNAL OF SEA RESEARCH
DT Article
DE Biodiversity; Species Richness; Functional Diversity (FD); Functional
   Change; Trait Analysis; Zoobenthos
ID ECOSYSTEM SERVICES; DIVERSITY MEASURES; CURRENT KNOWLEDGE; SPECIES
   RICHNESS; BALTIC SEA; BIODIVERSITY; REDUNDANCY; TRAITS; CONSERVATION;
   COMMUNITIES
AB Alterations to ecosystem function due to reductions in species richness are predicted to increase as humans continue to affect the marine environment, especially in coastal areas, which serve as the interface between land and sea. The potential functional consequences due to reductions in species diversity have attracted considerable attention recently but little is known about the consequence of such loss in natural communities. We examined how the potential for function is affected by natural reductions in taxon richness using empirical (non-simulated) coastal marine benthic macrofaunal data from the Skagerrak-Baltic Sea region (N. Europe), where taxon richness decreases 25-fold, from 151 to 6 taxa. To estimate functional changes we defined multiple traits (10 traits and 51 categories) on which trait category richness, functional diversity (FD) and number of taxa per trait category were calculated. Our results show that decrease in taxon richness leads to an overall reduction in function but functional richness remains comparatively high even at the lowest level of taxon richness. Although the taxonomic reduction was sharp, up to 96% of total taxon richness, we identified both potential thresholds in functioning and subtler changes where function was maintained along the gradient. The functional changes were not only caused by reductions in taxa per trait category, some categories were maintained or even increased. Primarily, the reduction in species richness altered trait categories related to feeding, living and movement and thus potentially could have an effect on various ecosystem processes. This highlights the importance of recognising ecosystem multifunctionality, especially at low taxonomic richness. We also found that in this system rare species (singletons) did not stand for the functional complexities and changes. Our findings were consistent with theoretical and experimental predictions and suggest that a large proportion of the information about alterations of function is found in measures such as functional diversity and number of taxa per trait category. (C) 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
RI Josefson, Alf/J-8174-2013; Bremner, Julie/H-6002-2018
OI Tornroos, Anna/0000-0002-5790-2449
TC 22
Z9 23
SN 1385-1101
EI 1873-1414
PD APR
PY 2015
VL 98
BP 49
EP 56
DI 10.1016/j.seares.2014.04.010
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000357146900007
ER

PT J
AU Kalogeropoulou, V
   Keklikoglou, K
   Lampadariou, N
AF Kalogeropoulou, V.
   Keklikoglou, K.
   Lampadariou, N.
TI Functional diversity patterns of abyssal nematodes in the Eastern
   Mediterranean: A comparison between cold seeps and typical deep sea
   sediments
SO JOURNAL OF SEA RESEARCH
DT Article
DE Functional diversity; Nematodes; Cold seeps; Deep sea; Eastern
   Mediterranean; BTA analysis
ID MOSBY-MUD-VOLCANO; FREE-LIVING NEMATODES; TRAITS ANALYSIS BTA;
   VERTICAL-DISTRIBUTION; COMMUNITY STRUCTURE; METAZOAN MEIOFAUNA;
   ENVIRONMENTAL VARIABLES; NORTHEAST ATLANTIC; FEEDING ECOLOGY; MATURITY
   INDEX
AB Spatial patterns in deep sea nematode biological trait composition and functional diversity were investigated between chemosynthetic and typical deep sea ecosystems as well as between different microhabitats within the chemosynthetic ecosystems, in the Eastern Mediterranean. The chemosynthetic ecosystems chosen were two mud volcanoes, Napoli at 1950 m depth and Amsterdam at 2040 m depth which are cold seeps characterized by high chemosynthetic activity and spatial heterogeneity. Typical deep sea ecosystems consisted of fine-grained silt-clay sediments which were collected from three areas located in the south Ionian Sea at 2765 to 2840 m depth, the southern Cretan margin at 1089 to 1998 m depth and the Levantine Sea at 3055 to 3870 m depth. A range of biological traits (9 traits; 31 categories) related to buccal morphology, tail shape, body size, body shape, life history strategy, sediment position, cuticle morphology, amphid shape and presence of somatic setae were combined to identify patterns in the functional composition of nematode assemblages between the two habitats, the two mud volcanoes (macroscale) and between the microhabitats within the mud volcanoes (microscale). Data on trait correspondence was provided by biological information on species and genera. A total of 170 nematode species were allocated in 67 different trait combinations, i.e. functional groups, based on taxonomic, morphological and behavioral characteristics. The Biological Trait Analysis (BTA) revealed significant differences between the mud volcanoes and the typical deep sea sediments indicating the presence of different biological functions in ecologically very different environments. Moreover, chemosynthetic activity and habitat heterogeneity within mud volcanoes enhance the presence of different biological and ecological functions in nematode assemblages of different microhabitats. Functional diversity and species richness patterns varied significantly across the different environmental gradients prevailing in the study areas. Biological trait analysis, with the addition of newly introduced trait categories, and functional diversity outcomes provided greater explanatory power of ecosystem functioning than species richness and taxonomic diversity. (C) 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
OI Keklikoglou, Kleoniki/0000-0002-6693-2033
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 1385-1101
EI 1873-1414
PD APR
PY 2015
VL 98
BP 57
EP 72
DI 10.1016/j.seares.2014.11.003
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000357146900008
ER

PT J
AU Faulwetter, S
   Papageorgiou, N
   Koulouri, P
   Fanini, L
   Chatzinikolaou, E
   Markantonatou, V
   Pavloudi, C
   Chatzigeorgiou, G
   Keklikoglou, K
   Vasileiadou, K
   Basset, A
   Pinna, M
   Rosati, I
   Reizopoulou, S
   Nicolaidou, A
   Arvanitidis, C
AF Faulwetter, Sarah
   Papageorgiou, Nafsika
   Koulouri, Panayota
   Fanini, Lucia
   Chatzinikolaou, Eva
   Markantonatou, Vasiliki
   Pavloudi, Christina
   Chatzigeorgiou, Georgios
   Keklikoglou, Kleoniki
   Vasileiadou, Katerina
   Basset, Alberto
   Pinna, Maurizio
   Rosati, Ilaria
   Reizopoulou, Sofia
   Nicolaidou, Artemis
   Arvanitidis, Christos
TI Resistance of polychaete species and trait patterns to simulated species
   loss in coastal lagoons
SO JOURNAL OF SEA RESEARCH
DT Article
DE Lagoons; Polychaetes; Random species loss; Functional capacity;
   Redundancy; Biological traits
ID MARINE BENTHIC ECOSYSTEMS; FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; TRANSITIONAL WATERS;
   BIOLOGICAL TRAITS; FLUCTUATING ENVIRONMENT; MACROBENTHIC COMMUNITY;
   TAXONOMIC RESOLUTION; BIODIVERSITY LOSS; CURRENT KNOWLEDGE; ANALYSIS BTA
AB The loss of species is known to have negative impacts on the integrity of ecosystems, but the details of this relationship are still far from being fully understood. This study investigates how the distribution patterns of polychaete species and their associated biological trait patterns in six Mediterranean coastal lagoons change under computationally simulated scenarios of random species loss. Species were progressively removed from the full polychaete assemblage and the similarity between the full assemblage and the reduced matrices of both species and trait patterns was calculated. The results indicate the magnitude of changes that might follow species loss in the real world, and allow consideration of the resistance of the system's functional capacity to loss of species, expressed through the species' biological traits as an approximation to functioning. Comparisons were made between the changes in the distribution of species and of traits, as well as between the six different lagoons. While the change of species and trait patterns was strongly correlated within most lagoons, different lagoons showed distinctly different patterns. In disturbed lagoons, the dominance of one or few species was the major driver for the observed patterns and the loss of these species caused extreme changes. Less disturbed lagoons were less susceptible to extreme changes and had a greater resistance towards species loss. Species richness appears to be less important for the ability of the lagoons to buffer changes, instead the initial composition of the assemblage and the identity of the lost species determine the response of the system and our ability to predict changes of the assemblage's functional potential. (C) 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
RI Chatzinikolaou, Eva/G-9439-2011; Arvanitidis, Christos/J-1540-2016;
   Vasileiadou, Katerina/F-4680-2018; Rosati, Ilaria/J-6761-2012
OI Chatzinikolaou, Eva/0000-0002-7171-5105; Arvanitidis,
   Christos/0000-0002-6924-5255; Vasileiadou, Katerina/0000-0002-5057-6417;
   Rosati, Ilaria/0000-0003-3422-7230; Chatzigeorgiou,
   Giorgos/0000-0003-3507-6542; Keklikoglou, Kleoniki/0000-0002-6693-2033;
   Pinna, Maurizio/0000-0001-8335-4098; Koulouri, Panayota
   (Yolanda)/0000-0002-3418-7980; Papageorgiou,
   Nafsika/0000-0003-3039-7910; Fanini, Lucia/0000-0003-2301-2576;
   Faulwetter, Sarah/0000-0003-4892-4440
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 1385-1101
EI 1873-1414
PD APR
PY 2015
VL 98
BP 73
EP 82
DI 10.1016/j.seares.2014.09.003
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000357146900009
ER

PT J
AU Queiros, AM
   Bruggeman, J
   Stephens, N
   Artioli, Y
   Butenschon, M
   Blackford, JC
   Widdicombe, S
   Allen, JI
   Somerfield, PJ
AF Queiros, Ana M.
   Bruggeman, Jorn
   Stephens, Nicholas
   Artioli, Yuri
   Butenschoen, Momme
   Blackford, Jeremy C.
   Widdicombe, Stephen
   Allen, J. Icarus
   Somerfield, Paul J.
TI Placing biodiversity in ecosystem models without getting lost in
   translation
SO JOURNAL OF SEA RESEARCH
DT Article
DE BEF; Biogeochemical; Ecosystem function; Functional diversity; Species
   richness; Trait
ID CLIMATE-CHANGE; FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; SEDIMENT REWORKING; BIOLOGICAL
   TRAITS; ABRA-OVATA; FOOD WEBS; NORTH-SEA; MARINE; OCEAN; COMMUNITIES
AB A key challenge to progressing our understanding of biodiversity's role in the sustenance of ecosystem function is the extrapolation of the results of two decades of dedicated empirical research to regional, global and future landscapes. Ecosystem models provide a platform for this progression, potentially offering a holistic view of ecosystems where, guided by the mechanistic understanding of processes and their connection to the environment and biota, large-scale questions can be investigated. While the benefits of depicting biodiversity in such models are widely recognized, its application is limited by difficulties in the transfer of knowledge from small process oriented ecology into macro-scale modelling. Here, we build on previous work, breaking down key challenges of that knowledge transfer into a tangible framework, highlighting successful strategies that both modelling and ecology communities have developed to better interact with one another. We use a benthic and a pelagic case-study to illustrate how aspects of the links between biodiversity and ecosystem process have been depicted in marine ecosystem models (ERSEM and MIRO), from data, to conceptualisation and model development. We hope that this framework may help future interactions between biodiversity researchers and model developers by highlighting concrete solutions to common problems, and in this way contribute to the advance of the mechanistic understanding of the role of biodiversity in marine (and terrestrial) ecosystems. (C) 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
RI Somerfield, Paul/J-9189-2014; Artioli, Yuri/J-1524-2015
OI Somerfield, Paul/0000-0002-7581-5621; Artioli, Yuri/0000-0002-5498-4223;
   Butenschon, Momme/0000-0002-4592-9927; Queiros, Ana/0000-0002-7067-3177;
   Bruggeman, Jorn/0000-0003-2493-2323; Stephens,
   Nicholas/0000-0002-7282-5605
TC 10
Z9 10
SN 1385-1101
EI 1873-1414
PD APR
PY 2015
VL 98
BP 83
EP 90
DI 10.1016/j.seares.2014.10.004
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000357146900010
ER

PT J
AU Ye, NH
   Zhang, XW
   Miao, M
   Fan, X
   Zheng, Y
   Xu, D
   Wang, JF
   Zhou, L
   Wang, DS
   Gao, Y
   Wang, YT
   Shi, WY
   Ji, PF
   Li, DM
   Guan, Z
   Shao, CW
   Zhuang, ZM
   Gao, ZW
   Qi, J
   Zhao, FQ
AF Ye, Naihao
   Zhang, Xiaowen
   Miao, Miao
   Fan, Xiao
   Zheng, Yi
   Xu, Dong
   Wang, Jinfeng
   Zhou, Lin
   Wang, Dongsheng
   Gao, Yuan
   Wang, Yitao
   Shi, Wenyu
   Ji, Peifeng
   Li, Demao
   Guan, Zheng
   Shao, Changwei
   Zhuang, Zhimeng
   Gao, Zhengquan
   Qi, Ji
   Zhao, Fangqing
TI Saccharina genomes provide novel insight into kelp biology
SO NATURE COMMUNICATIONS
DT Article
ID ALGA ECTOCARPUS-SILICULOSUS; DE-NOVO IDENTIFICATION; LAMINARIA-DIGITATA;
   BROWN-ALGAE; RNA-SEQ; PHYLOGENETIC ANALYSES; MANNITOL METABOLISM;
   MAXIMUM-LIKELIHOOD; DEFENSE RESPONSES; GENE PREDICTION
AB Seaweeds are essential for marine ecosystems and have immense economic value. Here we present a comprehensive analysis of the draft genome of Saccharina japonica, one of the most economically important seaweeds. The 537-Mb assembled genomic sequence covered 98.5% of the estimated genome, and 18,733 protein-coding genes are predicted and annotated. Gene families related to cell wall synthesis, halogen concentration, development and defence systems were expanded. Functional diversification of the mannuronan C-5-epimerase and haloperoxidase gene families provides insight into the evolutionary adaptation of polysaccharide biosynthesis and iodine antioxidation. Additional sequencing of seven cultivars and nine wild individuals reveal that the genetic diversity within wild populations is greater than among cultivars. All of the cultivars are descendants of a wild Saccharina japonica accession showing limited admixture with Saccharina longissima. This study represents an important advance toward improving yields and economic traits in Saccharina and provides an invaluable resource for plant genome studies.
RI QI, JI/E-2797-2016; Shao, Changwei/I-2054-2016
OI Shao, Changwei/0000-0002-6953-2203; Zhao, Fangqing/0000-0002-6216-1235
TC 48
Z9 53
SN 2041-1723
PD APR
PY 2015
VL 6
AR 6986
DI 10.1038/ncomms7986
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000353705100004
PM 25908475
ER

PT J
AU McClanahan, TR
   Graham, NAJ
   MacNeil, MA
   Cinner, JE
AF McClanahan, T. R.
   Graham, N. A. J.
   MacNeil, M. A.
   Cinner, J. E.
TI Biomass-based targets and the management of multispecies coral reef
   fisheries
SO CONSERVATION BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE ecosystem function; Indian Ocean; life-history traits; resource
   management; sustainable fisheries; wilderness
ID UNDERWATER VISUAL-CENSUS; ECOSYSTEM-BASED MANAGEMENT; REFERENCE POINTS;
   MARINE RESERVES; ESCAPE GAPS; FISH; RESPONSES; SUSTAINABILITY;
   EXPLOITATION; COMMUNITIES
AB The failure of fisheries management among multispecies coral reef fisheries is well documented and has dire implications for the 100 million people engaged in these small-scale operations. Weak or missing management institutions, a lack of research capacity, and the complex nature of these ecosystems have heralded a call for ecosystem-based management approaches. However, ecosystem-based management of coral reef fisheries has proved challenging due to the multispecies nature of catches and the diversity of fish functional roles. We used data on fish communities collected from 233 individual sites in 9 western Indian Ocean countries to evaluate changes in the site's functional composition and associated life-history characteristics along a large range of fish biomass. As biomass increased along this range, fish were larger and grew and matured more slowly while the abundance of scraping and predatory species increased. The greatest changes in functional composition occurred below relatively low standing stock biomass (<600 kg/ha); abundances of piscivores, apex predators, and scraping herbivores were low at very light levels of fishing. This suggests potential trade-offs in ecosystem function and estimated yields for different management systems. Current fishing gear and area restrictions are not achieving conservation targets (proposed here as standing stock biomass of 1150 kg/ha) and result in losses of life history and ecological functions. Fish in reefs where destructive gears were restricted typically had very similar biomass and functions to young and low compliance closures. This indicates the potentially important role of fisheries restrictions in providing some gains in biomass and associated ecological functions when fully protected area enforcement potential is limited and likely to fail. Our results indicate that biomass alone can provide broad ecosystem-based fisheries management targets that can be easily applied even where research capacity and information is limited. Of particular value, is our finding that current management tools may be used to reach key ecosystem-based management targets, enabling ecosystem-based management in many socioeconomic contexts.
RI MacNeil, M. Aaron/E-8196-2017; Graham, Nicholas/C-8360-2014
OI MacNeil, M. Aaron/0000-0001-8406-325X; Graham,
   Nicholas/0000-0002-0304-7467; Cinner, Joshua/0000-0003-2675-9317;
   McClanahan, Timothy/0000-0001-5821-3584
TC 34
Z9 34
SN 0888-8892
EI 1523-1739
PD APR
PY 2015
VL 29
IS 2
BP 409
EP 417
DI 10.1111/cobi.12430
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000351353400012
PM 25494592
ER

PT J
AU Severo-Neto, F
   Teresa, FB
   Froehlich, O
AF Severo-Neto, Francisco
   Teresa, Fabricio B.
   Froehlich, Otavio
TI Ecomorphology and diet reflect the spatial segregation between two
   Siluriformes species inhabiting a stream of the Bodoquena Plateau, in
   Central Brazil
SO IHERINGIA SERIE ZOOLOGIA
DT Article
DE Pimelodella; Impatfinis; ecomorphogical traits; mesohabitats; trophic
   ecology
ID FISH ASSEMBLAGE; HABITAT; RIVER; FLOODPLAIN; TAXOCENES; PATTERNS;
   ECOLOGY; STATE; FOOD
AB Pimelodella taenioptera Miranda Ribeiro, 1914 and Imparfinis schubarti (Gomes, 1956) are two of the most common fish species in Bodoquena Plateau streams, Paraguay basin. These species have benthic habits and subaquatical observations suggested that they present differentiation in their preference for mesohabitat types. Pimelodella taenioptera shows preference for slow waters, such as pools, while I. schubarti is associated to riffles. In this study we investigated if the known patterns of mesohabitat use of?. taenioptera and I. schubarti can be predict by their ecomorphological and trophic traits. We described the dietary habits and ecomorphological attributes of? taenioptera and I. schubarti individuals, captured in the Parque Nacional da Serra da Bodoquena (PNSB), Mato Grosso do Sul state, central Brazil. Pimelodella taenioptera presented a more generalist diet, consuming a total of 23 different food items. Imparfinis schubarti have a diet based exclusively on aquatic insects. The ecomorphological analysis revealed that the species differed in relation to five morphological traits associated to habitat use (p<0.01). The results of this study reveal a clear functional dissimilarity between P. taenioptera and I. shubarti. The observed trophic and ecomorphological patterns are congruent with the known habitat use for these species and probably reflect the spatial and temporal variability on conditions and resources present in riffles and pools. Therefore, as expected, the morphological and feeding attributes represent predictive information related to mesohabitat use.
RI Teresa, Fabricio/F-7885-2012
OI Teresa, Fabricio/0000-0002-1357-4391
TC 1
Z9 2
SN 0073-4721
EI 1678-4766
PD MAR 31
PY 2015
VL 105
IS 1
BP 62
EP 68
DI 10.1590/1678-4766201510516268
SC Zoology
UT WOS:000357553400008
ER

PT J
AU Rivest, EB
   Gouhier, TC
AF Rivest, Emily B.
   Gouhier, Tarik C.
TI Complex Environmental Forcing across the Biogeographical Range of Coral
   Populations
SO PLOS ONE
DT Article
ID OCEAN ACIDIFICATION; ELEVATED-TEMPERATURE; CARBONATE CHEMISTRY;
   DIURNAL-VARIATION; LOCAL ADAPTATION; REEF; PH; SEAWATER; OXYGEN;
   CALCIFICATION
AB Although there is a substantial body of work on how temperature shapes coastal marine ecosystems, the spatiotemporal variability of seawater pH and corresponding in situ biological responses remain largely unknown across biogeographic ranges of tropical coral species. Environmental variability is important to characterize because it can amplify or dampen the biological consequences of global change, depending on the functional relationship between mean temperature or pH and organismal traits. Here, we characterize the spatiotemporal variability of pH, temperature, and salinity at fringing reefs in Moorea, French Polynesia and Nanwan Bay, Taiwan using advanced time series analysis, including wavelet analysis, and infer their potential impact on the persistence and stability of coral populations. Our results demonstrate that both the mean and variance of pH and temperature differed significantly between sites in Moorea and Taiwan. Seawater temperature at the Moorea site passed the local bleaching threshold several times within the similar to 45 day deployment while aragonite saturation state at the Taiwan site was often below commonly observed levels for coral reefs. Our results showcase how a better understanding of the differences in environmental conditions between sites can (1) provide an important frame of reference for designing laboratory experiments to study the effects of environmental variability, (2) identify the proximity of current environmental conditions to predicted biological thresholds for the coral reef, and (3) help predict when the temporal variability and mean of environmental conditions will interact synergistically or antagonistically to alter the abundance and stability of marine populations experiencing climate change.
TC 9
Z9 9
SN 1932-6203
PD MAR 23
PY 2015
VL 10
IS 3
AR UNSP e0121742
DI 10.1371/journal.pone.0121742
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000351987300288
PM 25799322
ER

PT J
AU Acevedo-Trejos, E
   Brandt, G
   Bruggeman, J
   Merico, A
AF Acevedo-Trejos, Esteban
   Brandt, Gunnar
   Bruggeman, Jorn
   Merico, Agostino
TI Mechanisms shaping size structure and functional diversity of
   phytoplankton communities in the ocean
SO SCIENTIFIC REPORTS
DT Article
ID MARINE-PHYTOPLANKTON; SPECIES RICHNESS; CELL-SIZE; TROPHIC INTERACTIONS;
   ECOSYSTEM MODEL; NORTH-ATLANTIC; BIODIVERSITY; DYNAMICS; PATTERNS;
   PRODUCTIVITY
AB The factors regulating phytoplankton community composition play a crucial role in structuring aquatic food webs. However, consensus is still lacking about the mechanisms underlying the observed biogeographical differences in cell size composition of phytoplankton communities. Here we use a trait-based model to disentangle these mechanisms in two contrasting regions of the Atlantic Ocean. In our model, the phytoplankton community can self-assemble based on a trade-off emerging from relationships between cell size and (1) nutrient uptake, (2) zooplankton grazing, and (3) phytoplankton sinking. Grazing 'pushes' the community towards larger cell sizes, whereas nutrient uptake and sinking 'pull' the community towards smaller cell sizes. We find that the stable environmental conditions of the tropics strongly balance these forces leading to persistently small cell sizes and reduced size diversity. In contrast, the seasonality of the temperate region causes the community to regularly reorganize via shifts in species composition and to exhibit, on average, bigger cell sizes and higher size diversity than in the tropics. Our results raise the importance of environmental variability as a key structuring mechanism of plankton communities in the ocean and call for a reassessment of the current understanding of phytoplankton diversity patterns across latitudinal gradients.
OI Merico, Agostino/0000-0001-8095-8056; Bruggeman,
   Jorn/0000-0003-2493-2323; Acevedo-Trejos, Esteban/0000-0003-4222-7062
TC 21
Z9 21
SN 2045-2322
PD MAR 9
PY 2015
VL 5
AR 8918
DI 10.1038/srep08918
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000350551900001
PM 25747280
ER

PT J
AU Frank, O
   Michael, V
   Pauker, O
   Boedeker, C
   Jogler, C
   Rohde, M
   Petersen, J
AF Frank, Oliver
   Michael, Victoria
   Paeuker, Orsola
   Boedeker, Christian
   Jogler, Christian
   Rohde, Manfred
   Petersen, Joern
TI Plasmid curing and the loss of grip - The 65-kb replicon of Phaeobacter
   inhibens DSM 17395 is required for biofilm formation, motility and the
   colonization of marine algae
SO SYSTEMATIC AND APPLIED MICROBIOLOGY
DT Article
DE Biofilm formation; Microbe-host interactions; Motility; Plasmid
   incompatibility; Roseobacter group; Rosette formation
ID PSEUDOMONAS-AERUGINOSA; CORE OLIGOSACCHARIDE; ROSEOBACTER CLADE;
   GALLAECIENSIS; GENES; PHOTOSYNTHESIS; BIOSYNTHESIS; ADAPTATION;
   SYMBIOSIS; BACTERIA
AB Surface colonization is characteristic for a broad range of marine roseobacters and many strains have been isolated from biofilms, microbial mats and dinoflagellates. Phaeobacter inhibens DSM 17395, one of the best-studied representatives of the Roseobacter group, is an effective colonizer of marine surfaces, but the genetic basis of this trait is unknown. Based on the composition of its 65-kb RepA-I type plasmid that contains more than 20 genes for polysaccharide metabolism, including a rhamnose operon, which is required for O-antigen formation in Escherichia coli, it was hypothesized that this replicon was essential for surface attachment. Accordingly, a holistic approach was taken and the functional role of this extrachromosomal element in P. inhibens was investigated. Plasmid curing was performed with the homologous RepA-I replication system of Dinoroseobacter shibae DSM 16493(T). The Delta 65-kb mutant completely lost its stickiness and could neither attach to artificial (glass, polystyrene) nor to natural surfaces (algae) and, consequently, its ability to form biofilms was impaired. Surprisingly, the mutant also lost the capacity for flagellar swimming motility required for surface colonization and the dispersal of biofilms. The data clearly showed that the 65-kb replicon of P. inhibens DSM 17395 was a genuine biofilm plasmid-mediating surface attachment. Homologous replicons are widely distributed among Rhodobacterales thus indicating the general importance of extrachromosomal elements for biofilm formation. (C) 2015 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.
TC 14
Z9 14
SN 0723-2020
PD MAR
PY 2015
VL 38
IS 2
BP 120
EP 127
DI 10.1016/j.syapm.2014.12.001
SC Biotechnology & Applied Microbiology; Microbiology
UT WOS:000353364700008
PM 25595869
ER

PT J
AU Ramanan, R
   Kang, Z
   Kim, BH
   Cho, DH
   Jin, L
   Oh, HM
   Kim, HS
AF Ramanan, Rishiram
   Kang, Zion
   Kim, Byung-Hyuk
   Cho, Dae-Hyun
   Jin, Long
   Oh, Hee-Mock
   Kim, Hee-Sik
TI Phycosphere bacterial diversity in green algae reveals an apparent
   similarity across habitats
SO ALGAL RESEARCH-BIOMASS BIOFUELS AND BIOPRODUCTS
DT Article
DE Green algae; Phycosphere bacteria; Algal-bacterial interactions;
   Pyrosequencing; Bacteroidetes; Plant Growth Promoting Bacteria;
   Proteobacteria
ID ALEXANDRIUM SPP.; WASTE-WATER; GROWTH; COMMUNITIES; SPECIFICITY;
   PRODUCTIVITY; MICROALGAE; MICROBIOTA; RHIZOBIUM; CULTURES
AB Phytoplankton and bacteria play the foremost role in primary production and often act in unison in biogeochemical cycling. Studies conducted so far are inconclusive on species specificity of phycosphere bacteria as the overarching function of specific clades of algae-associated bacteria, for instance Roseobacter in sulfur cycling, is widely held. In this study, we attempt to demonstrate the diversity of phycosphere bacteria in phylogenetically divergent unialgal green algae from vastly different environmental samples like soil, freshwater, marine, and wastewater with diatom and cyanobacteria as an outgroup. Diversity analyses using Differential Gel Gradient Electrophoresis (DGGE) revealed the predominant presence of bacteria belonging to Bacteroidetes phylum (46% of all strains). 454 pyrosequencing of selected strains from different habitats not only confirmed the presence of Bacteroidetes (33.1% of total reads) but also revealed the presence of bacteria belonging to alpha-Proteobacteria (52.6%), all in close association with their host. Majority of those symbiotic bacteria have been classified as Plant Growth Promoting Bacteria (PGPB) including prominent Sphingomonads and Rhizobacter. Results suggest that although host algae might encourage species specific interactions, specific functional traits are prerequisite for proximal adhesion in nutrient-rich phycosphere. While Bacteroidetes is known to have significant role in nutrient cycling through degradation of plant and algal macromolecules and for its attached growth, PGPB have proven symbiosis with plants and the overwhelming presence of these bacteria in green algae points to possible co-evolution. (C) 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
RI Jin, Long/G-8084-2015
OI Jin, Long/0000-0003-3808-5217; Ramanan, Rishiram/0000-0002-4641-9603
TC 21
Z9 22
SN 2211-9264
PD MAR
PY 2015
VL 8
BP 140
EP 144
DI 10.1016/j.algal.2015.02.003
SC Biotechnology & Applied Microbiology
UT WOS:000352274800021
ER

PT J
AU Morton, B
AF Morton, Brian
TI The biology and functional morphology of the placental embryo-brooding
   Neolepton salmoneum, a comparison with Neolepton subtrigonum (Bivalvia:
   Cyamioidea: Neoleptonidae), and a discussion of affinities
SO AMERICAN MALACOLOGICAL BULLETIN
DT Article
DE anatomy; reproduction and reproductive strategy; phylogenetic
   affinities; Veneroidea; neoteny
ID MOLECULAR PHYLOGENY; CILIARY MECHANISMS; LIVING FOSSIL; HONG-KONG;
   MOLLUSCA; SOUTH; LIFE; INTERRELATIONSHIPS; LAMELLIBRANCHS; GAIMARDIIDAE
AB The anatomies of two species of Neoleptonidae are described. Clearly heterodont with cardinal and lateral hinge teeth, the shell also has an internal, parivincular ligament. Shell form suggests a shallow burrowing mode of life in coarse gravels in coastal waters. The labial palps are small and the intestine short further suggesting deposit feeding in well-sorted gravels. A pronounced prodissoconch (II) with a marginal ridge argues for lecithotrophic development further facilitating re-colonization of a narrow niche. In most anatomical respects, the two species are simplified with conjoined inhalant and pedal apertures and few posterior sensory mantle papillae. The ctenidia comprise subequal demibranchs with the outer reduced and the inner modified for internally fertilized embryo brooding. The attachment of each embryo chord to the demibranch filaments is probably from secretions produced by basal glands developed on their abrofrontal surfaces. There may also be secondary external pallial brooding, accounting for the ridged prodissoconch II with attachment achieved via secretions from oil glands in the mantle margin.
   Comparisons are made with representatives of the earliest-considered affiliates of the Cyamioidea, that is, the Arcticoidea [now rejected], the confamilial Gaimardiidae and Cyamiidae, and the recently suggested Ungulinidae. It is considered that although neoteny has been proposed for the Turtoniidae, Sportellidae, and Neleptonidae to explain cyamioidean small size, anatomical features of the studied species of the latter family herein investigated suggest, rather, that they are simply 'small' there being, contrary to the conclusions of others, little evidence of paedomorphosis. In this scenario, smallness is not a reflection of neoteny. It is the evolutionary selection of a life history trait and opted recipe for success.
   Notwithstanding, earlier suggestions of an affiliation with the Veneroidea are considered plausible, although no reason is seen for not retaining the superfamily Cyamioidea nor its, as contemporaneously recognized, families, including the Neoleptonidae.
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 0740-2783
EI 2162-2698
PD MAR
PY 2015
VL 33
IS 1
BP 1
EP 21
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Zoology
UT WOS:000351417000001
ER

PT J
AU Matzelle, AJ
   Sara, G
   Montalto, V
   Zippay, M
   Trussell, GC
   Helmuth, B
AF Matzelle, Allison J.
   Sara, Gianluca
   Montalto, Valeria
   Zippay, Mackenzie
   Trussell, Geoffrey C.
   Helmuth, Brian
TI A bioenergetics framework for integrating the effects of multiple
   stressors: Opening a 'black box' in climate change research
SO AMERICAN MALACOLOGICAL BULLETIN
DT Article
DE Intertidal; Dynamic Energy Budget model; Biophysical model;
   Ecophysiology; Mytilus californianus
ID ROCKY INTERTIDAL COMMUNITIES; ENERGY BUDGET MODELS; MYTILUS-EDULIS L.;
   BODY-TEMPERATURE; PREDATION RISK; PHYSIOLOGICAL STRESS; THERMAL
   PHYSIOLOGY; FUNCTIONAL TRAITS; MARINE ECOSYSTEMS; FOOD AVAILABILITY
AB Climate change is already impacting marine ecosystems across a range of scales, from individual physiology, to changes in species interactions and community structure, and ultimately to patterns in geographic distribution. Predicting how marine ecosystems will respond to environmental change is a significant challenge because vulnerability to climatic and non-climatic stressors is highly variable, and depends on an organism's functional traits, tolerance to stressors, and the environment in which it lives. We present a mechanistic approach based on biophysical and dynamic energy budget models that integrates the cumulative effects of multiple environmental stressors (temperature and food) and stress associated with the presence of predators (the "fear of being eaten"), with the functional traits of an organism. We describe how multiple factors such as feeding time, food availability, and weather can be combined into a few simple metrics and explore how the physiological and behavioral impacts of predation risk can be included in this framework by altering prey feeding time and performance. Importantly, we highlight several critical gaps in our basic understanding of the fundamental mechanisms that drive responses to multiple stressors in natural systems. The framework presented here is, thus, intended to serve as a guide for the formulation of explicit, testable hypotheses and further controlled experimentation.
OI Helmuth, Brian/0000-0003-0180-3414; SARA', Gianluca/0000-0002-7658-5274
TC 11
Z9 11
SN 0740-2783
EI 2162-2698
PD MAR
PY 2015
VL 33
IS 1
BP 150
EP 160
DI 10.4003/006.033.0107
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Zoology
UT WOS:000351417000017
ER

PT J
AU Gribben, PE
   Heasman, KG
AF Gribben, Paul E.
   Heasman, Kevin G.
TI DEVELOPING FISHERIES AND AQUACULTURE INDUSTRIES FOR PANOPEA ZELANDICA IN
   NEW ZEALAND
SO JOURNAL OF SHELLFISH RESEARCH
DT Article
DE aquaculture; fisheries; geoduck; Panopea zelandica; New Zealand
ID GEODUCK CLAM; MARINE INVERTEBRATE; GROWTH; AGE; FERTILIZATION; BIVALVIA;
   MORTALITY; GENEROSA; HIATELLIDAE; HARVEST
AB Valuable fisheries and aquaculture industries for the geoduck Panopea generosa in North America, have stimulated interest in developing similar activities for geoduck species in New Zealand. The potential for establishing commercial enterprises for P. zelandica in New Zealand is reviewed. Although small fisheries for this species have existed since the late 1980s, the total annual landings have never exceeded 31.4 t. In 2006, P. zelandica was placed onto the New Zealand Quota Management System, with a total allowable catch of 40.5 t. Despite low capture rates, P. zelandica has several traits-similar to those for Panopea generosa-that may make it amenable for fisheries and aquaculture development. In terms of fisheries, it is typically found in benign coastal embayments and harbors, and it appears most dense in shallow subtidal waters (<15 m). Developing a sustainable fishery, however, will be contingent on a full understanding of the reproductive biology and ecology of P. zelandica; its unusual reproductive strategy (functional protandry) may result in a fishery that specifically targets females, which dominate the larger/older size classes in wild populations. With respect to aquaculture, adults can be readily spawned and larvae grown through to settlement. The largest impediment to fisheries development is a lack of information on the location of actual populations, and the low densities and natural mortality rates of known populations. The development of aquaculture will be hindered primarily by the ability to cultivate postsettlement individuals. Under current legislation, cultured marine organisms must be grown on structures, as a result of seabed ownership issues, although pond culture may be an alternative method for cultivating hatchery-reared stock. Despite these issues, P. zelandica shows potential for commercial exploitation, and it is a primary species identified to meet the New Zealand aquaculture sector's ambitious target of NZ$1 billion by 2025.
OI Heasman, Kevin/0000-0003-1928-9978
TC 5
Z9 5
SN 0730-8000
EI 1943-6319
PD MAR
PY 2015
VL 34
IS 1
BP 5
EP 10
DI 10.2983/035.034.0103
SC Fisheries; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000351743300002
ER

PT J
AU Dexter, E
   Bollens, SM
   Rollwagen-Bollens, G
   Emerson, J
   Zimmerman, J
AF Dexter, Eric
   Bollens, Stephen M.
   Rollwagen-Bollens, Gretchen
   Emerson, Josh
   Zimmerman, Julie
TI Persistent vs. ephemeral invasions: 8.5 years of zooplankton community
   dynamics in the Columbia River
SO LIMNOLOGY AND OCEANOGRAPHY
DT Article
ID SAN-FRANCISCO ESTUARY; COPEPOD PSEUDODIAPTOMUS-INOPINUS; CTENOPHORE
   MNEMIOPSIS-LEIDYI; CORBICULA-FLUMINEA BIVALVIA; TIDAL MARSH CHANNELS;
   ENVIRONMENTAL VARIABLES; NORTH-AMERICA; CLIMATE-CHANGE; POTENTIAL
   COMPETITION; DISTRIBUTION PATTERNS
AB Nonindigenous aquatic species are becoming increasingly common in coastal and inland waters, largely due to the global transport of zooplankton via commercial shipping and recreational boating. The cost of mitigation and lost income due to invasive zooplankton is estimated in the billions of dollars annually, yet we know little about the temporal dynamics of these invaders. Analysis of an 8.5-year (June 2005-December 2013) zooplankton time series from the Columbia River revealed contrasting patterns of invasion dynamics between species, cyclical periods of community invasion, and key environmental variables that constrain populations of invasive zooplankton. We identified four seasonal zooplankton communities (autumn/invaded, winter/barren, spring/rotifer, and transitional) that are strongly correlated with changes in chlorophyll content and water temperature, with peak abundances of invasive zooplankters occurring during periods of maximum water temperature. Additionally, we observed contrasting patterns of phenology between persistent and ephemeral invasive populations, with successful invaders exhibiting delayed annual peaks in population abundance. Two invasive zooplanktersthe copepod Pseudodiaptomus forbesi and larval Asian clam Corbicula flumineadominate the zooplankton community in late summer and early autumn. Likewise, our results support conclusions from a growing body of literature that delayed phenology may be a key functional trait for successful invaders.
OI Rollwagen-Bollens, Gretchen/0000-0002-5127-5720
TC 13
Z9 14
SN 0024-3590
EI 1939-5590
PD MAR
PY 2015
VL 60
IS 2
BP 527
EP 539
DI 10.1002/lno.10034
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000351126500014
ER

PT J
AU Edwards, KF
   Thomas, MK
   Klausmeier, CA
   Litchman, E
AF Edwards, Kyle F.
   Thomas, Mridul K.
   Klausmeier, Christopher A.
   Litchman, Elena
TI Light and growth in marine phytoplankton: allometric, taxonomic, and
   environmental variation
SO LIMNOLOGY AND OCEANOGRAPHY
DT Article
ID FLUCTUATING LIGHT; INTERSPECIFIC DIFFERENCES; COMMUNITY STRUCTURE;
   UTILIZATION TRAITS; SIZE DEPENDENCE; NORTH PACIFIC; DIATOMS; MODEL;
   OCEAN; COMPETITION
AB Light-dependent growth of phytoplankton is a fundamental process in marine ecosystems, but we lack a comprehensive view of how light utilization traits vary across genotypes and species, and how this variation is structured by cell size, taxonomy, and environmental gradients. Here, we compile 308 growth-irradiance experiments performed on 119 species of marine phytoplankton from all major functional groups, and characterize growth-irradiance relationships in terms of the initial slope of the growth-irradiance curve (), the optimal irradiance above which growth declines (I-opt), and the maximum growth rate ((max)). We find that declines with increasing cell size, although cell size appears to be a weak constraint on this trait. There are significant differences across taxa in and (max), with dinoflagellates, raphidophytes, and diazotrophs having the lowest values for both traits, and Phaeocystis spp. and diatoms having relatively high values. I-opt does not vary among taxonomic groups, and all traits exhibit large variation within most groups. Open-ocean isolates tend to have higher , lower I-opt, and lower (max) than coastal isolates, implying adaptation to low light and low productivity. The three traits are correlated across species such that and I-opt are negatively related while (max) is positively correlated with both of these traits. There is some evidence that high carries a cost of high N demand even when nitrogen (not light) is limiting. The results elucidate contrasting light-related ecological strategies across phytoplankton and should help improve the parameterization of major functional groups in biogeochemical models.
RI Klausmeier, Christopher/J-9339-2012
OI Thomas, Mridul/0000-0002-5089-5610
TC 47
Z9 47
SN 0024-3590
EI 1939-5590
PD MAR
PY 2015
VL 60
IS 2
BP 540
EP 552
DI 10.1002/lno.10033
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000351126500015
ER

PT J
AU Eerkes-Medrano, D
   Feehan, CJ
   Leys, SP
AF Eerkes-Medrano, Dafne
   Feehan, Colette J.
   Leys, Sally P.
TI Sponge cell aggregation: checkpoints in development indicate a high
   level of organismal complexity
SO INVERTEBRATE BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE cell lines; development; regeneration; stem cells; Porifera
ID MARINE SPONGE; DISSOCIATED CELLS; HEXACTINELLIDA SPONGE;
   MICROCIONA-PROLIFERA; EXTRACELLULAR-MATRIX; SUBERITES-DOMUNCULA;
   REGENERATION; CULTURES; REAGGREGATION; REPRODUCTION
AB Studies of regeneration provide insight across many scales of animal biology from the processes of cellular communication to the ecology of whole populations. Sponges are highly regenerative animals, with studies showing adults can both recover large portions of their body after predation or damage due to storms, and even reform whole individuals, via an aggregation stage, from dissociated tissues. While sponges are clearly highly regenerative, few studies actually show dissociated cells forming functional individuals. As sponges often serve as model organisms for studying the development and function of traits in metazoans, determining the universality and mechanics of their regeneration potential is important. We tested the capacity of members of seven sponge species from temperate freshwater and marine environments, from a range of taxonomic positions, and with different habits, to form functional sponges after dissociation. Development to a functional sponge progressed through a series of checkpoints: the sorting of cells and removal of debris; adhesion to a substrate and differentiation of cells; organization of cells into tissues; and regionalization of tissues. Two of the seven species tested, Spongilla lacustris and Haliclona cf. permollis, progressed through all four checkpoints, while the remaining five species progressed to various levels of development before aggregates disintegrated. Our findings highlight three important conclusions: (1) The ability of aggregates to differentiate into functional sponges is not as widespread as previously thought; (2) The species-specific ability of aggregates to develop to functional sponges appears to be an adaptive trait; and (3) The progression of development in aggregates through checkpoints, which in later development involves formation of tissues and regionalization of tissues, highlights the complexity of the sponge body plan and suggests fundamental rules in development shared across metazoans.
RI Leys, Sally/A-2660-2014
OI Feehan, Colette/0000-0001-7849-4053
TC 7
Z9 7
SN 1077-8306
EI 1744-7410
PD MAR
PY 2015
VL 134
IS 1
BP 1
EP 18
DI 10.1111/ivb.12072
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Zoology
UT WOS:000350641600001
ER

PT J
AU Tepolt, CK
AF Tepolt, C. K.
TI Adaptation in marine invasion: a genetic perspective
SO BIOLOGICAL INVASIONS
DT Article; Proceedings Paper
CT Workshop on Molecular Tools for Monitoring Marine Invasive Species
CY SEP 12-14, 2012
CL Lecce, ITALY
DE Adaptation; Genetics; Marine invasion; Next-generation sequencing;
   Selection
ID SNAIL LITTORINA-SAXATILIS; MUSSELS GENUS MYTILUS; SPECIES DISTRIBUTION
   MODELS; BRYOZOAN BUGULA-NERITINA; HERRING CLUPEA-HARENGUS; EUROPEAN
   GREEN CRAB; CLIMATE-CHANGE; LOCAL ADAPTATION; POPULATION GENOMICS;
   BIOLOGICAL INVASIONS
AB Genetic adaptation-heritable changes that alter an organism's performance-may facilitate invasion at several scales, but is seldom considered in predicting and managing marine invasions. However, a growing body of research-largely based on emerging genetic approaches-suggests that adaptation is possible and potentially widespread in the marine realm. Here, I review evidence for adaptation in marine invasion, considering both quantitative and genetic studies. Quantitative studies, which consider trait-based differences between populations or individuals without directly examining genetic makeup, have suggested local adaptation in several high-profile species. This implies that invasion risk may not be constant from population to population within a species, a key assumption of most invasion models. However, in many quantitative studies, the effects of heritable adaptive changes may be confounded with the effects of plasticity. Molecular approaches can help disentangle these effects, and studies at the genomic level are beginning to elucidate the specific genetic patterns and pathways underlying adaptation in invasion. While studies at this scale are currently rare in the marine invasion literature, they are likely to become increasingly prevalent-and useful-now that next-generation sequencing approaches have become tractable in non-model systems. Both traditional and emerging genetic approaches can improve our understanding of adaptation in marine invasions, and can aid managers in making accurate predictions of invasion spread and risk.
OI , Carolyn/0000-0002-7062-3452
TC 12
Z9 12
SN 1387-3547
EI 1573-1464
PD MAR
PY 2015
VL 17
IS 3
SI SI
BP 887
EP 903
DI 10.1007/s10530-014-0825-8
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000350675900006
ER

PT J
AU Andersen, KH
   Beyer, JE
AF Andersen, Ken H.
   Beyer, Jan E.
TI Size structure, not metabolic scaling rules, determines fisheries
   reference points
SO FISH AND FISHERIES
DT Article
DE Beverton-Holt; data-poor; metabolic theory; recruitment; size spectrum
ID DENSITY-DEPENDENT GROWTH; LIFE-HISTORY PARAMETERS; NATURAL MORTALITY;
   MARINE FISH; REPRODUCTIVE STRATEGY; POPULATION REGULATION; INDETERMINATE
   GROWTH; ONTOGENIC GROWTH; GENERAL-MODEL; PELAGIC FISH
AB Impact assessments of fishing on a stock require parameterization of vital rates: growth, mortality and recruitment. For data-poor' stocks, vital rates may be estimated from empirical size-based relationships or from life-history invariants. However, a theoretical framework to synthesize these empirical relations is lacking. Here, we combine life-history invariants, metabolic scaling and size-spectrum theory to develop a general size- and trait-based theory for demography and recruitment of exploited fish stocks. Important concepts are physiological or metabolic scaled mortalities and flux of individuals or their biomass to size. The theory is based on classic metabolic relations at the individual level and uses asymptotic size W as a trait. The theory predicts fundamental similarities and differences between small and large species in vital rates and response to fishing. The central result is that larger species have a higher egg production per recruit than small species. This means that density dependence is stronger for large than for small species and has the consequence that fisheries reference points that incorporate recruitment do not obey metabolic scaling rules. This result implies that even though small species have a higher productivity than large species their resilience towards fishing is lower than expected from metabolic scaling rules. Further, we show that the fishing mortality leading to maximum yield per recruit is an ill-suited reference point. The theory can be used to generalize the impact of fishing across species and for making demographic and evolutionary impact assessments of fishing, particularly in data-poor situations.
OI Andersen, Ken Haste/0000-0002-8478-3430
TC 37
Z9 37
SN 1467-2960
EI 1467-2979
PD MAR
PY 2015
VL 16
IS 1
BP 1
EP 22
DI 10.1111/faf.12042
SC Fisheries
UT WOS:000349616600001
ER

PT J
AU Hale, JR
   Mims, MC
   Bogan, MT
   Olden, JD
AF Hale, Jessica R.
   Mims, Meryl C.
   Bogan, Michael T.
   Olden, Julian D.
TI Links between two interacting factors, novel habitats and non-native
   predators, and aquatic invertebrate communities in a dryland environment
SO HYDROBIOLOGIA
DT Article
DE Invasive species; Stock ponds; Aridland; Bullfrogs; Mosquitofish;
   Tinajas
ID MOSQUITOFISH GAMBUSIA-AFFINIS; RANA-CATESBEIANA; DIET COMPOSITION;
   DESERT STREAM; LONG-TERM; BIODIVERSITY; BULLFROGS; ECOLOGY; PONDS;
   DIVERSITY
AB In dryland regions, increased demand for water has led to the reduction of natural aquatic habitats and threatens persisting aquatic habitats. In the Madrean Sky Islands (MSI), water demands have also resulted in the creation of novel aquatic habitats, including stock ponds. Stock ponds are important surrogate habitat for native species, yet little is known about the aquatic invertebrates utilizing these habitats. Additionally, stock ponds support non-native vertebrate predators including American bullfrogs (Lithobates catesbeiana) and Western mosquitofish (Gambusia affinis), and the effects of these predators on invertebrate communities in stock ponds are unknown. We explored similarities in invertebrate communities in stream pools and stock ponds and compared aquatic invertebrate community composition, abundance, and richness in stock ponds with and without non-native predators. We found that despite considerable functional (trait-based) overlap in aquatic invertebrate communities, a large majority (81%) of taxa were exclusive to either stock ponds or stream pools. Additionally, we observed few differences in aquatic invertebrate community composition, abundance, and richness in stock ponds with and without non-native predators. We discuss ecological implications of our observations, limitations of our approach, and the importance of future work in determining the role of stock ponds in conservation of the region's aquatic invertebrates.
OI Olden, Julian/0000-0003-2143-1187; Mims, Meryl/0000-0003-0570-988X
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 0018-8158
EI 1573-5117
PD MAR
PY 2015
VL 746
IS 1
BP 313
EP 326
DI 10.1007/s10750-014-2024-0
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000348186600025
ER

PT J
AU Narum, SR
   Campbell, NR
AF Narum, Shawn R.
   Campbell, Nathan R.
TI Transcriptomic response to heat stress among ecologically divergent
   populations of redband trout
SO BMC GENOMICS
DT Article
DE Climate change; Oncorhynchus mykiss gairdneri; Redband trout; RNA-seq;
   Thermal adaptation; Transcriptome
ID DIFFERENTIAL EXPRESSION ANALYSIS; CLIMATE-CHANGE; THERMAL TOLERANCE;
   GENE-EXPRESSION; FUNCTIONAL GENOMICS; DROSOPHILA-BUZZATII; RESISTANCE
   TRAITS; MARINE FISHES; ADAPTATION; TEMPERATURE
AB Background: As ectothermic organisms have evolved to differing aquatic climates, the molecular basis of thermal adaptation is a key area of research. In this study, we tested for differential transcriptional response of ecologically divergent populations of redband trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss gairdneri) that have evolved in desert and montane climates. Each pure strain and their F1 cross were reared in a common garden environment and exposed over four weeks to diel water temperatures that were similar to those experienced in desert climates within the species' range. Gill tissues were collected from the three strains of fish (desert, montane, F1 crosses) at the peak of heat stress and tested for mRNA expression differences across the transcriptome with RNA-seq.
   Results: Strong differences in transcriptomic response to heat stress were observed across strains confirming that fish from desert environments have evolved diverse mechanisms to cope with stressful environments. As expected, a large number of total transcripts (12,814) were differentially expressed in the study (FDR <= 0.05) with 2310 transcripts in common for all three strains, but the desert strain had a larger number of unique differentially expressed transcripts (2875) than the montane (1982) or the F1 (2355) strain. Strongly differentiated genes (>4 fold change and FDR <= 0.05) were particularly abundant in the desert strain (824 unique contigs) relative to the other two strains (montane = 58; F1 = 192).
   Conclusions: This study demonstrated patterns of acclimation (i.e., phenotypic plasticity) within strains and evolutionary adaptation among strains in numerous genes throughout the transcriptome. Key stress response genes such as molecular chaperones (i.e., heat shock proteins) had adaptive patterns of gene expression among strains, but also a much higher number of metabolic and cellular process genes were differentially expressed in the desert strain demonstrating these biological pathways are critical for thermal adaptation to warm aquatic climates. The results of this study further elucidate the molecular basis for thermal adaptation in aquatic ecosystems and extend the potential for identifying genes that may be critical for adaptation to changing climates.
TC 30
Z9 30
SN 1471-2164
PD FEB 21
PY 2015
VL 16
AR 103
DI 10.1186/s12864-015-1246-5
SC Biotechnology & Applied Microbiology; Genetics & Heredity
UT WOS:000349861700001
PM 25765850
ER

PT J
AU Muntadas, A
   de Juan, S
   Demestre, M
AF Muntadas, Alba
   de Juan, Silvia
   Demestre, Montserrat
TI Integrating the provision of ecosystem services and trawl fisheries for
   the management of the marine environment
SO SCIENCE OF THE TOTAL ENVIRONMENT
DT Article
DE Benthic community; Ecosystem function; Ecosystem Service Providers
   (ESP); Fisheries; Integrated management; Mediterranean
ID BIOLOGICAL TRAITS; BENTHIC ECOSYSTEMS; COASTAL ECOSYSTEMS; MEDITERRANEAN
   SEA; BIODIVERSITY; DISTURBANCE; CONSERVATION; COMMUNITIES; INDICATORS;
   SEDIMENT
AB The species interaction and their biological traits (BT) determine the function of benthic communities and, hence, the delivery of ecosystem services. Therefore, disturbance of benthic communities by trawling may compromise ecosystem service delivery, including fisheries' catches. In this work, we explore 1) the impact of trawling activities on benthic functional components (after the BTA approach) and 2) how trawling impact may affect the ecosystem services delivered by benthic communities. To this aim, we assessed the provision of ecosystem services by adopting the concept of Ecosystem Service Providers (ESP), i.e. ecological units that perform ecosystem functions that will ultimately deliver ecosystem services. We studied thirteen sites subjected to different levels of fishing effort in the Mediterranean. From a range of environmental variables included in the study, we found ESPs to be mainly affected by fishing effort and grain size. Our results suggested that habitat type has significant effects on the distribution of ESPs and this natural variability influences ESP response to trawling at a specific site. In order to summarize the complex relationships between human uses, ecosystem components and the demand for ecosystem services in trawling grounds, we adapted a DPSIR (Drivers-Pressures-State Change-Impact-Response) framework to the study area, emphasizing the role of society as Drivers of change and actors demanding management Responses. This integrative framework aims to inform managers about the interactions between all the elements involved in the management of trawling grounds, highlighting the need for an integrated approach in order to ensure ecosystem service provision. (C) 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
RI de Juan, Silvia/M-2553-2014; Demestre, Montserrat/M-1719-2014
OI de Juan, Silvia/0000-0002-8891-8371; Demestre,
   Montserrat/0000-0003-2866-4821
TC 8
Z9 8
SN 0048-9697
EI 1879-1026
PD FEB 15
PY 2015
VL 506
BP 594
EP 603
DI 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2014.11.042
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000347576800060
PM 25433378
ER

PT J
AU Morales, J
   Squeo, FA
   Tracol, Y
   Armas, C
   Gutierrez, JR
AF Morales, Joaquin
   Squeo, Francisco A.
   Tracol, Yann
   Armas, Cristina
   Gutierrez, Julio R.
TI Resource economics and coordination among above- and below-ground
   functional traits of three dominant shrubs from the Chilean coastal
   desert
SO JOURNAL OF PLANT ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE drought; functional diversity; mass fractions; root distribution;
   specific leaf area
ID ROOT LIFE-SPAN; BIOMASS ALLOCATION; PLANT-RESPONSES; WATER RELATIONS;
   LEAF; ECOSYSTEMS; STRATEGIES; SPECTRUM; TREES; PRECIPITATION
AB Aims
   Plant functional traits determine how plants respond to environmental factors and influence ecosystem processes. Among them, root traits and analyses of relations between above and below-ground traits in natural communities are scarce. Methods we characterized a set of above-and below-ground traits of three dominant shrub species in a semiarid shrub-steppe that had contrasting leaf phenological habits (deciduous, semideciduous and evergreen). We analysed if there was coordination among above-and below-ground resource economics patterns: i.e. patterns of biomass allocation, construction costs and lifespan.
   Important Findings
   Above-and below-ground traits and their resource economics relations pointed to species-specific functional strategies to cope with drought and poor soils and to a species ranking of fast to slow whole-plant strategies in terms of resource uptake, biomass construction costs and turnover. The deciduous shrub, Proustia cuneifolia, had relatively deep and even distribution of roots, and high proportion of short-lived tissues of low C construction costs: it had high fine to coarse root and high leaf-to-stem biomass ratios, high specific leaf area (SLA), and stems of low wood density. This strategy allows Proustia to maximize and coordinate above-and below-ground resources uptake as long as the most limiting factor (water) is available, but at the cost of having relative high plant biomass turnover. The evergreen Porlieria chilensis, instead, displayed a more conservative and slow strategy in terms of resource economics. It had similar to 80% of the roots in the 40 cm topsoil profile, low proportion of fine compared with coarse roots and low leaf-to-stem ratios, low SLA and stems of high wood density, i.e. it invested in C costly tissues that, overall, persist longer but probably at the cost of having lower plant resource uptake rates. Traits in the semideciduous Adesmia bedwellii were in between these two functional extremes. Our results revealed high functional diversity and above- and below-ground complementarity in resource economics among these three codominant species in the Chilean coastal desert.
RI Armas, Cristina/A-1128-2012
OI Armas, Cristina/0000-0003-0356-8075
TC 5
Z9 5
SN 1752-9921
EI 1752-993X
PD FEB
PY 2015
VL 8
IS 1
BP 70
EP 78
DI 10.1093/jpe/rtu010
SC Plant Sciences; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000350242200008
ER

PT J
AU Gormley, IC
   Bedigian, D
   Olmstead, RG
AF Gormley, Ingeborg C.
   Bedigian, Dorothea
   Olmstead, Richard G.
TI Phylogeny of Pedaliaceae and Martyniaceae and the Placement of Trapella
   in Plantaginaceae s. l.
SO SYSTEMATIC BOTANY
DT Article
DE Convergent evolution; ETS; ndhF; phylogeny; sesame; trnLF
ID FLOWERING PLANTS; GROUP CLASSIFICATION; CHLOROPLAST DNA; SESAME;
   EVOLUTION; SCROPHULARIACEAE; SEQUENCES; DISINTEGRATION; VERBENACEAE;
   SYSTEMATICS
AB Pedaliaceae and Martyniaceae are Old World and New World families occurring primarily in arid environments with some taxa exhibiting similar adaptations to dispersal by large animals. Their taxonomic histories have also been intertwined, since they have often been combined as one family (e.g. Pedaliaceae). The temperate Asian aquatic plant Trapella was also assigned to Pedaliaceae, based on fruits with similar dispersal traits. With expanded sampling of both families, including Trapella, and data from ndhF, trnLF, and ETS sequences, this study confirms that the two families are distinct lineages, identifies a new placement for Trapella in tribe Gratioleae (Plantaginaceae s. l.), and shows that the two families exhibit a combination of shared floral morphology due to their proximity in Lamiales, and convergent functional morphology for dispersal. The phylogeny indicates the three tribes of Pedaliaceae are monophyletic, but that Sesamum is not.
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 0363-6445
EI 1548-2324
PD FEB
PY 2015
VL 40
IS 1
BP 259
EP 268
DI 10.1600/036364415X686558
SC Plant Sciences; Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000350250100028
ER

PT J
AU Chiba, S
   Batten, SD
   Yoshiki, T
   Sasaki, Y
   Sasaoka, K
   Sugisaki, H
   Ichikawa, T
AF Chiba, Sanae
   Batten, Sonia D.
   Yoshiki, Tomoko
   Sasaki, Yuka
   Sasaoka, Kosei
   Sugisaki, Hiroya
   Ichikawa, Tadafumi
TI Temperature and zooplankton size structure: climate control and
   basin-scale comparison in the North Pacific
SO ECOLOGY AND EVOLUTION
DT Article
DE Climate control; continuous plankton recorder; copepod; functional
   diversity; North Pacific; Pacific decadal oscillation; thermal niche;
   zooplankton size
ID SUB-ARCTIC PACIFIC; COPEPOD BIODIVERSITY; WARMER OCEAN; PLANKTON;
   ECOSYSTEMS; MESOZOOPLANKTON; OSCILLATION; POPULATIONS; BIOMASS; TRAITS
AB The global distribution of zooplankton community structure is known to follow latitudinal temperature gradients: larger species in cooler, higher latitudinal regions. However, interspecific relationships between temperature and size in zooplankton communities have not been fully examined in terms of temporal variation. To re-examine the relationship on a temporal scale and the effects of climate control thereon, we investigated the variation in copepod size structure in the eastern and western subarctic North Pacific in 2000-2011. This report presents the first basin-scale comparison of zooplankton community changes in the North Pacific based on a fully standardized data set obtained from the Continuous Plankton Recorder (CPR) survey. We found an increase in copepod community size (CCS) after 2006-2007 in the both regions because of the increased dominance of large cold-water species. Sea surface temperature varied in an east-west dipole manner, showing the typical Pacific Decadal Oscillation pattern: cooling in the east and warming in the west after 2006-2007. The observed positive correlation between CCS and sea surface temperature in the western North Pacific was inconsistent with the conventional interspecific temperature-size relationship. We explained this discrepancy by the geographical shift of the upper boundary of the thermal niche, the 9 degrees C isotherm, of large cold-water species. In the eastern North Pacific, the boundary stretched northeast, to cover a large part of the sampling area after 2006-2007. In contrast, in the western North Pacific, the isotherm location hardly changed and the sampling area remained within its thermal niche throughout the study period, despite the warming that occurred. Our study suggests that while a climate-induced basin-scale cool-warm cycle can alter copepod community size and might subsequently impact the functions of the marine ecosystem in the North Pacific, the interspecific temperature-size relationship is not invariant and that understanding region-specific processes linking climate and ecosystem is indispensable.
TC 14
Z9 14
SN 2045-7758
PD FEB
PY 2015
VL 5
IS 4
BP 968
EP 978
DI 10.1002/ece3.1408
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000349898100013
PM 25750722
ER

PT J
AU Troia, MJ
   Williams, LR
   Williams, MG
   Ford, NB
AF Troia, Matthew J.
   Williams, Lance R.
   Williams, Marsha G.
   Ford, Neil B.
TI The process domains concept as a framework for fish and mussel habitat
   in a coastal plain river of southeastern North America
SO ECOLOGICAL ENGINEERING
DT Article
DE Disturbance regime; Fluvial geomorphology; Functional traits; Hydraulic
   modeling; Neches River
ID FRESH-WATER MUSSELS; LIFE-HISTORY; ASSEMBLAGE STRUCTURE; COMMUNITY
   STRUCTURE; CONSERVATION STATUS; STREAM ECOSYSTEMS; SHELL SCULPTURE;
   UNITED-STATES; ABUNDANCE; TRAITS
AB Hydrologic processes interact with geomorphic patterns to create the spatial and temporal variation in riverine habitat that affects the distribution of aquatic species throughout stream networks. The process domains concept (PDC) states that longitudinally-abrupt changes in geomorphic processes along streams determine temporal patterns of natural disturbance that influence the distribution of stream organisms. Despite its potential generality, the PDC has been applied primarily to mountain streams of western North America. We tested the utility of the PDC as a conceptual framework for characterizing spatiotemporal variability in abiotic conditions and assessed the influence of process domains (PDs) on community composition of fishes and mussels along a fifth order river mainstem in the gulf coastal plain of the southeastern United States. We measured channel cross sections at three transects nested within three sites nested within three stream reaches to quantify multi-scale spatial variability in channel geomorphology along the mainstem of the Neches River, Texas, USA. Next, we modeled stage-dependent channel hydraulics to quantify temporal variability in habitat area and benthic disturbance. Lastly, we sampled fishes and mussels at each site and tested whether PDs correlate with spatial variation in taxonomic and functional community composition. Channel cross-sectional dimensions varied at the reach scale and affected the modeled temporal variability in habitat area and benthic disturbance. This interaction between channel geomorphology and disturbance regime indicated the presence of distinct PDs at the reach scale. Taxonomic composition of fishes did not differ among reaches, whereas abundance and richness of mussels were strongly reduced in the upper reach compared to the middle and lower reaches. Only slight differences in functional traits of fishes and mussels were apparent among reaches, suggesting that reach scale PDs do not influence community composition via the filtering of these functional traits. This study provides empirical evidence that the PDC is a useful framework for describing hydrogeomorphic conditions and mussel abundance and richness and can guide channel restorations in streams draining regions of low topography. (C) 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 0925-8574
EI 1872-6992
PD FEB
PY 2015
VL 75
BP 484
EP 496
DI 10.1016/j.ecoleng.2014.12.016
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Engineering
UT WOS:000349598200058
ER

PT J
AU Muller, T
   Freund, F
   Wildhagen, H
   Schmid, KJ
AF Mueller, Thomas
   Freund, Fabian
   Wildhagen, Henning
   Schmid, Karl J.
TI Targeted re-sequencing of five Douglas-fir provenances reveals
   population structure and putative target genes of positive selection
SO TREE GENETICS & GENOMES
DT Article
DE Sequence capture; Douglas-fir; Genetic diversity; Natural selection
ID NUCLEOTIDE DIVERSITY; VAR. MENZIESII; LINKAGE DISEQUILIBRIUM;
   DEMOGRAPHIC HISTORY; LOCAL ADAPTATION; EXOME CAPTURE; GENOME; EVOLUTION;
   CONIFERS; ASSOCIATION
AB Douglas-fir (Pseudotsuga menziesii) occurs in a coastal and an interior variety that differ in drought tolerance and other adaptive traits. To characterize genome-wide levels of genetic diversity in coding regions and to identify genes involved in local adaptation, we used targeted sequence capture to re-sequence 72 trees representing one interior and four coastal provenances. A custom NimbleGen sequence capture array was designed from 57,110 putative unique transcripts (PUTs) to enrich genomic sequencing libraries for these regions. Sequence analysis revealed that almost 100% of target regions were captured and sequenced in at least one individual. We found 79,910 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) whose genotypes were called in all individuals. The data confirmed genetic differentiation between interior and coastal provenances and revealed little differentiation between coastal provenances. The nucleotide diversity of the total sample was estimated as pi = 0.0032, which is at the lower end of values observed in conifers. Outlier tests of genetic differentiation identified 58 high-confidence candidate genes for directional selection with a broad functional diversity. A priori defined genes involved in drought tolerance showed a significantly higher genetic differentiation between interior and coastal Douglas-fir suggesting a different evolution despite a low level of polymorphism. The observed data showed a reduced level of polymorphisms with low minor allele frequencies compared to standard demographic models with two populations and migration. Targeted sequence capture is an efficient method to characterize the genetic diversity of conifer trees with a complex genome.
OI Wildhagen, Henning/0000-0003-4970-8539; Muller,
   Thomas/0000-0002-8723-5173
TC 11
Z9 11
SN 1614-2942
EI 1614-2950
PD FEB
PY 2015
VL 11
IS 1
AR 816
DI 10.1007/s11295-014-0816-z
SC Forestry; Genetics & Heredity; Agriculture
UT WOS:000349553500036
ER

PT J
AU Valls, A
   Coll, M
   Christensen, V
AF Valls, Audrey
   Coll, Marta
   Christensen, Villy
TI Keystone species: toward an operational concept for marine biodiversity
   conservation
SO ECOLOGICAL MONOGRAPHS
DT Article
DE classification tree; Ecopath model; food-web structure; index of
   keystoneness; keystone species; marine ecosystems; meta-analysis;
   mixed-trophic impact; rank correlation tests; scoring method
ID NW MEDITERRANEAN SEA; FOOD-WEB MODELS; INTERACTION STRENGTH; EXPLOITED
   ECOSYSTEMS; SENSITIVITY-ANALYSIS; ECOLOGICAL NETWORKS; CLIMATE-CHANGE;
   ADRIATIC SEA; COMMUNITIES; MANAGEMENT
AB Various definitions and indices have been proposed in the literature to identify keystone species. In this study, we intended to make the concept of keystone species operational for marine biodiversity conservation. We used an exclusive definition of keystone species, based on the original concept of keystone predator, and derived a new functional index of keystoneness (KS) from an ecosystem-modeling approach. First, several KS indices were formulated, by combining measures of the mixed-trophic impact (MTI) and biomass of species. Then, a meta-analysis was performed, based on 101 published Ecopath food-web models, selected with a scoring method, and representative of the variety of marine ecosystems worldwide. The indices were applied to the models, and two statistical methods were compared to select the most promising KS index. Rank correlation tests were performed to assess the balance between the contribution of the impact and biomass components to the different KS indices. In addition, a classification tree was implemented, based on ecosystem-specific thresholds applied to the latter species traits, and used to confirm the identified keystone species. The selected index obtained the highest number of models with positive results from both the rank correlation tests and the classification tree. We also demonstrated the limitations of existing KS indices previously applied in the literature. Species were ranked according to their estimates of keystoneness with the selected KS index, so that potential keystone species were quantitatively identified in the 101 modeled food webs. The standardized modeling approach allowed for a comparison of the identified keystone species across models: cartilaginous fishes and toothed whales obtained the highest occurrences. Finally, the selected KS index was applied to the well-known case study of Prince William Sound (Alaska, USA). Potentially significant anthropogenic (fishing) impacts on keystone species were also considered and discussed. The operational methodology presented is directly applicable to marine food webs, and may be adapted to other (freshwater or terrestrial) systems.
RI Christensen, Villy/C-3945-2009; Albo Puigserver, Marta/F-5693-2016
OI Christensen, Villy/0000-0003-0688-2633; Albo Puigserver,
   Marta/0000-0002-0477-5984; Ellison, Aaron/0000-0003-4151-6081
TC 26
Z9 27
SN 0012-9615
EI 1557-7015
PD FEB
PY 2015
VL 85
IS 1
BP 29
EP 47
DI 10.1890/14-0306.1
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000349389800003
ER

PT J
AU Kuebbing, SE
   Nunez, MA
AF Kuebbing, Sara E.
   Nunez, Martin A.
TI Negative, neutral, and positive interactions among nonnative plants:
   patterns, processes, and management implications
SO GLOBAL CHANGE BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE invader interactions; invasional meltdown; level of invasion; nonnative
   interactions; plant communities; positive interactions
ID COMMUNITY-LEVEL CONSEQUENCES; COMPETITIVE ABILITY; INVASIVE PLANTS;
   PYRACANTHA-ANGUSTIFOLIA; DEGRADED ECOSYSTEMS; COASTAL CALIFORNIA; ANNUAL
   GRASSES; ALIEN PLANTS; FACILITATION; TRAITS
AB The movement of species is one of the most pervasive forms of global change, and few ecosystems remain uninvaded by nonnative species. Studying species interactions is crucial for understanding their distribution and abundance, particularly for nonnative species because interactions may influence the probability of invasion and consequent ecological impact. Interactions among nonnatives are relatively understudied, though the likelihood of nonnative species co-occurrence is high. We quantify and describe the types of interactions among nonnative plants and determine what factors affect interaction outcomes for ecosystems globally. We reviewed 65 studies comprising 201 observations and recorded the interaction type, traits of the interacting species, and study characteristics. We conducted a census of interaction types and a meta-analysis of experiments that tested nonnative competition intensity. Both methods showed that negative and neutral interactions prevailed, and a number of studies reported that the removal of a dominant nonnative led to competitive release of other nonnatives. Positive interactions were less frequently reported and positive mean effect sizes were rare, but the plant characteristics nitrogen fixation, life cycle (annual or perennial), and functional group significantly influenced positive interactions. Positive interactions were three times more frequent when a neighboring nonnative was a nitrogen fixer and 3.5 times lower when a neighboring nonnative was an annual. Woody plants were two or four times more likely to have positive interactions relative to grasses or herbs, respectively. The prevalence of negative interactions suggests that managers should prepare for reinvasion of sites when treating dominant nonnatives. Though positive interactions were infrequent, managers may be able to anticipate positive interactions among nonnatives based upon traits of the co-occurring invaders. Predicting positive nonnative interactions is an important tool for determining habitat susceptibility to a particular invasion and for prioritizing management of nonnatives with a higher likelihood of positive interactions.
OI Nunez, Martin/0000-0003-0324-5479
TC 43
Z9 45
SN 1354-1013
EI 1365-2486
PD FEB
PY 2015
VL 21
IS 2
BP 926
EP 934
DI 10.1111/gcb.12711
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000348652400034
PM 25142018
ER

PT J
AU Kruk, C
   Martinez, A
   Nogueira, L
   Alonso, C
   Calliari, D
AF Kruk, Carla
   Martinez, Ana
   Nogueira, Lucia
   Alonso, Cecilia
   Calliari, Danilo
TI Morphological traits variability reflects light limitation of
   phytoplankton production in a highly productive subtropical estuary (Rio
   de la Plata, South America)
SO MARINE BIOLOGY
DT Article
ID SAN-FRANCISCO BAY; CELL-SIZE; SPRING PHYTOPLANKTON; ECOSYSTEM FUNCTION;
   COMMUNITY ECOLOGY; FUNCTIONAL TRAITS; MARITIME FRONT; BIOMASS; MARINE;
   DIVERSITY
AB Trait-based approaches are increasingly used to understand the responses of phytoplankton communities to changing environmental conditions. This paper analyses phytoplankton morphological traits (i.e. volume, surface to volume ratio) in a highly productive subtropical estuary (Rio de la Plata, South America). The goal was to investigate whether morphological variability, weighted by biovolume, supports the hypothesis that light is a key limiting factor for primary producers in this turbid and nutrient-rich estuary. A transect from nearly freshwater to marine stations was sampled with increasing mixing depth, decreasing turbidity and dissolved inorganic nitrogen concentration. Primary production (PP) and total biovolume were highest on the marine side of the turbidity front. In this area, morphologies of different high-order taxa converged towards smaller individual size and higher surface to volume ratio (S/V). Phytoplankton weighted average S/V increased with turbidity along the gradient, while individual size did so with salinity. High S/V and low morphological variability supported higher PP, appearing as responses to cope with light limitation in this environment. Multiple linear regressions indicated that morphological variability alone explained 72 % of PP, reinforcing the utility of trait-based approaches when targeting relations between phytoplankton communities and ecosystem functioning.
TC 9
Z9 9
SN 0025-3162
EI 1432-1793
PD FEB
PY 2015
VL 162
IS 2
BP 331
EP 341
DI 10.1007/s00227-014-2568-6
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000348564300009
ER

PT J
AU Raybaud, V
   Beaugrand, G
   Dewarumez, JM
   Luczak, C
AF Raybaud, V.
   Beaugrand, G.
   Dewarumez, J. -M.
   Luczak, C.
TI Climate-induced range shifts of the American jackknife clam Ensis
   directus in Europe
SO BIOLOGICAL INVASIONS
DT Article
DE American jackknife; Ensis directus; Ecological niche model; Thermal
   preference; Climate change; Geographical distribution
ID ECOLOGICAL NICHE MODELS; SOUTHERN NORTH-SEA; SPECIES DISTRIBUTIONS;
   ENGLISH-CHANNEL; RAZOR CLAM; MEDITERRANEAN SEA; FUNCTIONAL TRAITS;
   INTRODUCED RANGE; HABITAT MODELS; GLOBAL CHANGE
AB Mapping the future potential distribution of alien species has become an issue of great concern. Ecological niche models are increasingly used to forecast the spatial range of introduced species in the context of climate warming. Here, we studied the potential spread of the American jackknife clam Ensis directus into European waters. E. directus, a marine bivalve native to the American coasts, was observed in Europe for the first time in the German Bight at the end of the 1970s. Afterwards, the clam quickly colonized the surrounding waters of the North Sea. Although many studies focused on its biology, ecology and colonization, the extent to which E. directus may invade European and Nordic seas remained poorly known. In this study, we used two ecological niche models (ENMs), calibrated on the native area of the mollusk, to evaluate the potential distributional range of the bivalve over European seas. Under current environmental conditions, E. directus should continue to progress towards the southern coasts of France and may also invade new areas in the Adriatic Sea. Projections for the end of the century suggest that the probability of occurrence of E. directus increases from Denmark to France with both ENMs. The Tunisian coasts may also become a new suitable area for the mollusk but the results of the two ENMs differ for this region. Therefore, contrary to what is often observed, a southward range expansion of E. directus is probable, especially as climate will get warmer.
OI BEAUGRAND, GREGORY/0000-0002-0712-5223
TC 11
Z9 11
SN 1387-3547
EI 1573-1464
PD FEB
PY 2015
VL 17
IS 2
BP 725
EP 741
DI 10.1007/s10530-014-0764-4
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000348149700017
ER

PT J
AU Schirmel, J
   Mantilla-Contreras, J
   Gauger, D
   Blindow, I
AF Schirmel, Jens
   Mantilla-Contreras, Jasmin
   Gauger, Dorothea
   Blindow, Irmgard
TI Carabid beetles as indicators for shrub encroachment in dry grasslands
SO ECOLOGICAL INDICATORS
DT Article
DE Biomass; Cytisus scoparius; Fourth-corner-analysis; Functional traits;
   Habitat heterogeneity; Succession
ID LAND-USE; GROUND BEETLES; AGRICULTURAL LANDSCAPE; CALCAREOUS GRASSLANDS;
   ARTHROPOD DIVERSITY; SPECIES COMPOSITION; 4TH-CORNER PROBLEM; PLANT
   DIVERSITY; COASTAL DUNES; COLEOPTERA
AB Semi-natural grasslands are key habitats for biodiversity conservation in Central Europe. Shrub encroachment is one of the most threatening drivers of grassland degradation and affects soil properties, microclimate, and vegetation with possible impacts on higher trophic levels. We aimed to analyse the impact of shrub encroachment with broom (Cytisus scoparius) on carabid beetle diversity, species composition, and functional traits. In a field study on dry grasslands on the island of Hiddensee (Germany) we studied 15 sites along a gradient of increasing broom encroachment and classified them into three dry grassland types with low, medium, and high shrub cover. Our results provide evidence that shrub encroachment initially has positive effects on species richness and activity densities of dry grassland carabids. Carabid species composition differed among differently shrub-covered dry grassland types, and sites with low and high shrub cover were each characterised by unique carabid assemblages. The species composition of sites with a medium shrub biomass had a transitional character and contained species which are typical for open dry grassland, but also shared species with sites with a high shrub cover. Among functional trait parameters investigated, especially the body size of carabid beetles was related to environmental parameters associated with shrub encroachment. Body size was positively correlated to shrub biomass and soil humidity, but negatively to temperature. Eurytopy values of carabids were related to high litter cover, i.e. habitat generalist (eurytopic) species mainly occurred in densely shrub-encroached sites. In order to preserve unique carabid assemblages of open dry grasslands with stenotopic and smaller species, it is most important to prevent a shrub encroachment higher than about 60% cover. For management we suggest extensive grazing (by cattle, sheep or horses) to prevent shrub encroachment on dry grasslands. In areas with high shrub cover additionally the use of goats or mechanical removal of shrubs might be necessary. (C) 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
OI Mantilla Contreras, Jasmin/0000-0002-3888-7917
TC 10
Z9 11
SN 1470-160X
EI 1872-7034
PD FEB
PY 2015
VL 49
BP 76
EP 82
DI 10.1016/j.ecolind.2014.09.041
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000346954500009
ER

PT J
AU Saito, VS
   Siqueira, T
   Fonseca-Gessner, AA
AF Saito, Victor S.
   Siqueira, Tadeu
   Fonseca-Gessner, Alaide Ap.
TI Should phylogenetic and functional diversity metrics compose
   macroinvertebrate multimetric indices for stream biomonitoring?
SO HYDROBIOLOGIA
DT Article
DE Taxonomic diversity; Environmental assessment; Trait diversity;
   Functional traits; Aquatic insects; Biotic index
ID BIOLOGICAL CONDITION; INVERTEBRATE TRAITS; COMMUNITY STRUCTURE; ATLANTIC
   FOREST; SPECIES TRAITS; BRAZIL; INTEGRITY; CONSERVATION; ECOSYSTEMS;
   LANDSCAPE
AB The idea behind multimetric indices is to integrate information from several metrics to provide a general classification of water bodies without losing the particularities of each individual metric. Historically, multimetric indices use information on richness, taxon sensitivity, and taxonomic diversity. Recently, functional and phylogenetic diversity proved to capture different dimensions of biodiversity. Here we asked if these new metrics provide complementary information to classical metrics and should be included in multimetric indices. We used an index construction protocol based on statistical filters to test candidate metrics for range, sensitivity, and redundancy. We used macroinvertebrate data from streams located in a Savanna region of Brazil, encompassing a gradient of impact, to test our ideas. Of 41 candidate metrics, functional dispersion of functional diversity, mean nearest neighbor distance of phylogenetic diversity, and four classical metrics passed the filter selection composing the final multimetric index. Our results indicated that functional and phylogenetic diversity metrics indeed responded to environmental impact and complemented the information provided by classical metrics. We suggest that future indices should consider including new metrics of functional and phylogenetic diversity to properly monitor multiple dimensions of biodiversity.
RI Siqueira, Tadeu/A-6978-2009
OI Siqueira, Tadeu/0000-0001-5069-2904; Saito, Victor/0000-0001-6112-7249
TC 13
Z9 15
SN 0018-8158
EI 1573-5117
PD FEB
PY 2015
VL 745
IS 1
BP 167
EP 179
DI 10.1007/s10750-014-2102-3
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000346636900013
ER

PT J
AU Gupta, V
   Kumari, P
   Reddy, CRK
AF Gupta, Vishal
   Kumari, Puja
   Reddy, C. R. K.
TI Development and Characterization of Somatic Hybrids of Ulva reticulata
   Forsskal (x) Monostroma oxyspermum (Kutz.) Doty
SO FRONTIERS IN PLANT SCIENCE
DT Article
DE heterosis; hybrid; Monostroma; protoplast; Ulva
ID BIOTECHNOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVES; GRACILARIA RHODOPHYTA;
   PORPHYRA-YEZOENSIS; MARINE MACROALGAE; DNA METHYLATION; FATTY-ACIDS;
   CHLOROPHYTA; HYBRIDIZATION; GIGARTINALES; PROTOPLASTS
AB Ulvophycean species with diverse trait characteristics provide an opportunity to create novel allelic recombinant variants. The present study reports the development of seaweed variants with improved agronomic traits through protoplast fusion between Monostroma oxyspermum (Kutz.) Doty and Ulva reticulata Forsskal. A total of 12 putative hybrids were screened based on the variations in morphology and total DNA content over the fusion partners. DNA-fingerprinting by inter simple sequence repeat (ISSR) and amplified fragment length polymorphism (AFLP) analysis confirmed genomic introgression in the hybrids. The DNA fingerprint revealed sharing of parental alleles in regenerated hybrids and a few alleles that were unique to hybrids. The epigenetic variations in hybrids estimated in terms of DNA methylation polymorphism also revealed sharing of methylation loci with both the fusion partners. The functional trait analysis for growth showed a hybrid with heterotic trait (DGR% = 36.7 +/- 1.55%) over the fusion partners U. reticulata (33.2 +/- 2.6%) and M. oxyspermum (17.8 +/- 1.77%), while others were superior to the mid-parental value (25.2 +/- 2.2%) (p < 0.05). The fatty acid (FA) analysis of hybrids showed notable variations over fusion partners. Most hybrids showed increased polyunsaturated FAs (PUFAs) compared to saturated FAs (SFAs) and mainly includes the nutritionally important linoleic acid, a-linolenic acid, oleic acid, stearidonic acid, and docosahexaenoic acid. The other differences observed include superior cellulose content and antioxidative potential in hybrids over fusion partners. The hybrid varieties with superior traits developed in this study unequivocally demonstrate the significance of protoplast fusion technique in developing improved varients of macroalgae.
RI Chennur, Radhakrishna/G-2014-2012; gupta, vishal/G-4162-2012
OI Chennur, Radhakrishna/0000-0002-9869-5597; gupta,
   vishal/0000-0002-1518-6624; Kumari, Puja/0000-0002-3270-9722
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 1664-462X
PD JAN 29
PY 2015
VL 6
AR 3
DI 10.3389/fpls.2015.00003
SC Plant Sciences
UT WOS:000348720100001
PM 25688248
ER

PT J
AU Montana, J
   Finn, JK
   Norman, MD
AF Montana, Jasper
   Finn, Julian K.
   Norman, Mark D.
TI Liquid sand burrowing and mucus utilisation as novel adaptations to a
   structurally-simple environment in Octopus kaurna Stranks, 1990
SO BEHAVIOUR
DT Article
DE Octopus; burrowing; burying; cephalopod; fluidisation; mucus
ID CEPHALOPOD DYNAMIC CAMOUFLAGE; OCTOPODIDAE; EVOLUTION; BEHAVIOR
AB Cephalopods are often celebrated as masters of camouflage, but their exploitation of the soft-sediment habitats that dominate the ocean floor has demanded other anti-predator strategies. Previous research has identified a small number of cephalopods capable of burying into sand and mud, but the need to directly access the water column for respiration has restricted them to superficial burying. Here, we report on the first known sub-surface burrowing in the cephalopods, by Octopus kaurna, a small benthic species that uses advanced sand-fluidisation and adhesive mucus for sediment manipulation. This burrowing strategy appears linked to easily fluidised sediments as shown in experimental trials in three size-grades of sediment. While the selective pressures that drove evolution of this behaviour are unknown, its identification enriches our understanding of the possible life-history traits and functional role of mucus in other benthic octopus species living in soft-sediment environments.
OI Montana, Jasper/0000-0003-3405-2549
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0005-7959
EI 1568-539X
PY 2015
VL 152
IS 14
BP 1871
EP 1881
DI 10.1163/1568539X-00003313
SC Behavioral Sciences; Zoology
UT WOS:000364811500001
ER

PT S
AU Engelen, AH
   Serebryakova, A
   Ang, P
   Britton-Simmons, K
   Mineur, F
   Pedersen, MF
   Arenas, F
   Fernandez, C
   Steen, H
   Svenson, R
   Pavia, H
   Toth, G
   Viard, F
   Santos, R
AF Engelen, Aschwin H.
   Serebryakova, Alexandra
   Ang, Put
   Britton-Simmons, Kevin
   Mineur, Frederic
   Pedersen, Morten F.
   Arenas, Francisco
   Fernandez, Consolacion
   Steen, Henning
   Svenson, Robin
   Pavia, Henrik
   Toth, Gunilla
   Viard, Frederique
   Santos, Rui
BE Hughes, RN
   Hughes, DJ
   Smith, IP
   Dale, AC
TI CIRCUMGLOBAL INVASION BY THE BROWN SEAWEED SARGASSUM MUTICUM
SO OCEANOGRAPHY AND MARINE BIOLOGY: AN ANNUAL REVIEW, VOL 53
SE Oceanography and Marine Biology
DT Article; Book Chapter
DE seaweed; interactions; taxonomy; non-indigenous species; invasive
   species; invasion; ecology; impact; Sargassum muticum
ID ALGA ASCOPHYLLUM-NODOSUM; INTERTIDAL MACROALGAL ASSEMBLAGE; YENDO
   FENSHOLT POPULATIONS; OYSTER CRASSOSTREA-GIGAS; BIOLOGICAL INVASIONS;
   MARINE-ALGAE; UNDARIA-PINNATIFIDA; FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; REPRODUCTIVE
   EFFORT; HALIDRYS-SILIQUOSA
AB Hundreds of macroalgal species have been spread outside their natural range by human activities, and many of these introductions are occurring at a worldwide scale. This review considers one of the best-studied and most widespread invasive macroalgae, Sargassum muticum, to determine the traits and processes important in marine invasions and to identify important lines of future research. Particular emphasis is placed on the ecology of S. muticum in its native range and on the four stages of invasion transport, colonization, establishment, and spread integrating taxonomy, invasion history, dispersal, impact, invasiveness and invasibility, and general ecology. Although S. muticum has received a lot of scientific attention, with more than 650 papers on this species, key information on its taxonomy, invasive biology, and evolutionary potential is still lacking. Most previous studies have been local or descriptive or provide circumstantial evidence, and too few have been hypothesis driven. Only by local-scale research conducted in different geographical regions, especially including the native range, and developed in an eco-evolutionary framework, will it be possible to greatly improve our understanding of the complex of factors, traits, and processes involved in macroalgal invasions.
RI Algarve, CCMAR/C-2603-2018; Santos, Rui/B-4168-2008
OI Santos, Rui/0000-0002-7861-4366; Arenas, Francisco/0000-0001-6925-3805
TC 18
Z9 18
SN 0078-3218
BN 978-1-4987-0545-5
PY 2015
VL 53
BP 81
EP 126
D2 10.1201/b18733
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000364174100003
ER

PT J
AU Chmara, R
   Banas, K
   Szmeja, J
AF Chmara, Rafal
   Banas, Krzysztof
   Szmeja, Jozef
TI Changes in the structural and functional diversity of macrophyte
   communities along an acidity gradient in softwater lakes
SO FLORA
DT Article
DE Environmental filter; Functional diversity; Life history traits;
   Structural diversity
ID AQUATIC MACROPHYTES; LOBELIA-DORTMANNA; INORGANIC CARBON; PLANT
   DIVERSITY; WATER; VEGETATION; GROWTH; LIGHT; POPULATIONS; BIOMASS
AB We present a new approach to the diversity of macrophyte communities based on species richness (S), Simpson's diversity index (SD), Rao's functional diversity (FD), functional attribute diversity (FAD) and the share of life history traits along a gradient of acidity in softwater lakes. On the basis of 10,800 cover-plant samples (squares with an area of 0.1 m(2)) collected from 241 sections of the bottom (depth belts) of 38 lakes, four communities were identified using the TWINSPAN algorithm: moss carpet (median water pH 4.7), isoetids with acidophytic mosses (pH 5.5), isoetids with neutrophytic mosses (pH 63) and neutrophytic vascular plants with charophytes (pH 7.1). Along a gradient of increasing pH, the diversity of communities increases and the species composition and share of life history traits are subject to significant changes. Evergreen, plagiotropic and unanchored plants with small, thin leaves (mosses) are replaced by evergreen, rosette forms (isoetids), which are replaced by non-evergreen charophytes and broadleaf vascular plants, especially pondweeds, in addition to an increasing fraction of plants with generative reproduction. A strong relationship was found between plant traits (leaves and shoots) and environmental factors (pH and calcium content). The regulator of diversity in macrophyte communities is the calcium concentration in water. (C) 2015 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.
OI BANAS, KRZYSZTOF/0000-0002-2131-8400
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 0367-2530
EI 1618-0585
PY 2015
VL 216
BP 57
EP 64
DI 10.1016/j.flora.2015.09.002
SC Plant Sciences; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000363352500007
ER

PT J
AU Atala, C
   Schneider, C
   Bravo, G
   Quilodran, M
   Vargas, R
AF Atala, Cristian
   Schneider, Carlos
   Bravo, Gabriel
   Quilodran, Manuel
   Vargas, Reinaldo
TI Anatomical, physiological and chemical differences between populations
   of Pseudocyphellaria flavicans (Hook. f. & Taylor) Vain. from Chile
SO GAYANA BOTANICA
DT Article
DE Pseudocyphellaria flavicans; lichen ecophysiology; lichen anatomy;
   lichen chemistry; foliose lichens
ID DESICCATION TOLERANCE; EPIPHYTIC LICHENS; WATER RELATIONS; SOUTHERN
   CHILE; UMBILICARIACEAE; PHOTOSYNTHESIS; PHOTOBIONTS; ADAPTATIONS;
   DIVERSITY; FORESTS
AB Environmental conditions can affect lichen morphology, physiology and chemistry. Some functional traits; like thickness of thallus layers, photosystems condition, and presence of photoprotective and antioxidant compounds are key to colonizing new sites, and can change depending on light and moisture availability. In the present study, we compared the morphology, physiology and chemistry of the native Chilean lichen Pseudocyphellaria flavicans from two Coastal populations (Nahuelbuta and Contulmo, Araucania district), and one Andean population (Ralco, Bio-Bio district). Ralco is a more closed secondary forest, and can show dryer periods compared to Nahuelbuta and Contulmo. We found differences in thalli anatomy between populations. Ralco individuals had thinner upper cortex than Nahuelbuta individuals. Contulmo individuals had similar upper cortex thickness compared to the other two populations. We also found differences in the response of the maximal efficiency of the PSII (Fv/Fm) to desiccation and in the in situ values measured. We did not find differences between populations in the chemical traits. The differences between populations could be attributed to differences in local environmental conditions, namely moisture and light.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0717-6643
PY 2015
VL 72
IS 1
BP 21
EP 26
DI 10.4067/S0717-66432015000100003
SC Plant Sciences
UT WOS:000357967900003
ER

PT J
AU Wieder, WR
   Grandy, AS
   Kallenbach, CM
   Taylor, PG
   Bonan, GB
AF Wieder, W. R.
   Grandy, A. S.
   Kallenbach, C. M.
   Taylor, P. G.
   Bonan, G. B.
TI Representing life in the Earth system with soil microbial functional
   traits in the MIMICS model
SO GEOSCIENTIFIC MODEL DEVELOPMENT
DT Article
ID CARBON-USE-EFFICIENCY; ORGANIC-MATTER; LITTER DECOMPOSITION; NITROGEN
   DEPOSITION; ECOLOGICAL STRATEGIES; BACTERIAL-GROWTH; TROPICAL FOREST;
   ENZYME-ACTIVITY; K-SELECTION; R-SELECTION
AB Projecting biogeochemical responses to global environmental change requires multi-scaled perspectives that consider organismal diversity, ecosystem processes, and global fluxes. However, microbes, the drivers of soil organic matter decomposition and stabilization, remain notably absent from models used to project carbon (C) cycle-climate feedbacks. We used a microbial trait-based soil C model with two physiologically distinct microbial communities, and evaluate how this model represents soil C storage and response to perturbations. Drawing from the application of functional traits used to model other ecosystems, we incorporate copiotrophic and oligotrophic microbial functional groups in the MIcrobial-MIneral Carbon Stabilization (MIMICS) model; these functional groups are akin to 'gleaner' vs. 'opportunist' plankton in the ocean, or r- vs. K-strategists in plant and animal communities. Here we compare MIMICS to a conventional soil C model, DAYCENT (the daily time-step version of the CENTURY model), in cross-site comparisons of nitrogen (N) enrichment effects on soil C dynamics. MIMICS more accurately simulates C responses to N enrichment; moreover, it raises important hypotheses involving the roles of substrate availability, community-level enzyme induction, and microbial physiological responses in explaining various soil biogeochemical responses to N enrichment. In global-scale analyses, we show that MIMICS projects much slower rates of soil C accumulation than a conventional soil biogeochemistry in response to increasing C inputs with elevated carbon dioxide (CO2) - a finding that would reduce the size of the land C sink estimated by the Earth system. Our findings illustrate that tradeoffs between theory and utility can be overcome to develop soil biogeochemistry models that evaluate and advance our theoretical understanding of microbial dynamics and soil biogeochemical responses to environmental change.
OI WIEDER, WILLIAM/0000-0001-7116-1985
TC 42
Z9 42
SN 1991-959X
EI 1991-9603
PY 2015
VL 8
IS 6
BP 1789
EP 1808
DI 10.5194/gmd-8-1789-2015
SC Geology
UT WOS:000357125000012
ER

PT J
AU Rodriguez-Cabal, MA
   Gibbons, TC
   Schulte, PM
   Barrios-Garcia, MN
   Crutsinger, GM
AF Rodriguez-Cabal, Mariano A.
   Gibbons, Taylor C.
   Schulte, Patricia M.
   Noelia Barrios-Garcia, M.
   Crutsinger, Gregory M.
TI Comparing functional similarity between a native and an alien slug in
   temperate rain forests of British Columbia
SO NEOBIOTA
DT Article
AB The impacts of invasive alien species are greatest when they become dominant members of a community, introduce novel traits, and displace native species. Invasions by alien mollusks represent a novel context by which to compare trait differences between generalist native and introduced herbivores in terrestrial ecosystems. Here, we determined the abundance, habitat, feeding preferences, as well as the metabolic rate of the native Pacific banana slug (Ariolimax columbianus) and the alien black slug (Anion rufus) in the coastal forests of British Columbia, Canada. Through a series of observational and experimental studies, we found that alien slugs are more abundant, differ in their habitat preferences, and consumed more fungi (mushrooms) than native banana slugs. Conversely, in an enclosures experiment we found that herbivory damage by native slugs was higher compared to enclosures with alien only and control enclosures. Finally, metabolic rates were similar for both slug species. These results suggest that alien black slugs possess a suite of traits that make them functionally different from native banana slugs.
OI Schulte, Patricia/0000-0002-5237-8836
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 1619-0033
EI 1314-2488
PY 2015
VL 25
BP 1
EP 14
DI 10.3897/neobiota.25.8316
SC Biodiversity & Conservation
UT WOS:000354504500001
ER

PT J
AU Florez, CDR
   Colantonio, SE
AF Rodriguez Florez, C. D.
   Colantonio, S. E.
TI Biological affinities and regional microevolution among pre-Hispanic
   communities of Colombia's Northern Andes
SO ANTHROPOLOGISCHER ANZEIGER
DT Article
DE Dental non-metric data; biological continuity; interbreeding; migratory
   movements
ID SOUTH-AUSTRALIAN TWINS; UTO-AZTECAN PREMOLAR; CRANIOFACIAL MORPHOLOGY;
   MITOCHONDRIAL-DNA; DENTAL VARIATION; POPULATION HISTORY; AMERINDIAN
   POPULATION; DRYOPITHECUS PATTERN; MANDIBULAR MOLARS; LATE PLEISTOCENE
AB Dental non-metric data were used to examine the biological continuity of pre-Hispanic peoples of Colombia's Northern Andes, including highland, lowland and coastal peoples. This report contributes to studies regarding the peopling of South America by establishing a benchmark comparison that includes pre-Hispanic populations of the Northern Andes. The sample consisted of a total of 583 individuals from 56 cemeteries ranging in time from the Early Holocene (10,000 BP) to the Final Late Holocene (500 BP). Permanent dentitions from individuals between 5 and 40 years of age were scored for 87 dental traits based on the ASUDAS. A divergence matrix was programmed using the Smith's Mean Measure of Divergence equation (MMD). Bartlett's adjustment and Ascombe transformation were considered into MMD calculations. Principal Coordenate analysis was applied based on MMD matrix scores. A clear group was found that associated Initial Late Holocene samples with Final Late Holocene samples. Early Holocene samples are very different to that, and Middle Holocene samples show as morphologically intermediate series. A comparison of the frequencies by time and period showed that a limited biological continuity existed. Interbreeding among initial populations of the same regions is expressed in similar frequencies of dental traits within Early Holocene and Middle Holocene samples. Early Holocene samples did not match with Sinodont pattern according to discriminant function analysis. These findings help us to better understand the settlement process of human groups in the Northern Andes and its relationship with migratory movements in South America.
TC 3
Z9 4
SN 0003-5548
PY 2015
VL 72
IS 2
BP 141
EP 168
DI 10.1127/anthranz/2015/0454
SC Anthropology
UT WOS:000355637000002
PM 25807169
ER

PT J
AU Rodriguez-Gallego, C
   Navarro, T
   Meerts, P
AF Rodriguez-Gallego, Carmen
   Navarro, Teresa
   Meerts, Pierre
TI A comparative study of leaf trait relationships in coastal dunes in
   southern Spain
SO PLANT ECOLOGY AND EVOLUTION
DT Article; Proceedings Paper
CT Annual Meeting on Plant Ecology and Evolution (AMPEE2)
CY NOV 14, 2014
CL Louvain Neuve, BELGIUM
DE Mediterranean coastal dunes; specific leaf area; leaf nutrient
   concentrations; leaf consistence; deciduousness
ID PLANT FUNCTIONAL TYPES; NUTRIENT CONCENTRATIONS; LIFE-SPAN; GENERALITY;
   CALIFORNIA; SIZE; AREA; SOIL; AVAILABILITY; COMMUNITIES
AB Background and aims - Coastal dunes of southern Spain are an original Mediterranean ecosystem, hotspot of biodiversity, insufficiently studied under the functional ecology. We explore co-variation patterns among leaf traits (size, specific leaf area (SLA), nutrient concentrations (N, P, K...), deciduousness and leaf consistence), and growth form in 78 native coastal dune species.
   Methods - Three coastal dunes of contrasting climatic conditions were sampled and differentiated between fixed and mobile dunes. Species were classified based on growth form, deciduousness and leaf consistence. Leaf samples were collected following Cornelissen et al. (2003) and soil samples were also analysed by ICP-OES and elemental analysis.
   Key results - Positive co-variation patterns of SLA and leaf [N], and of leaf [N] and leaf [P], were found in two of three sites. Fixed dunes, with a higher proportion of large shrubs, evergreens, and sclerophyllous species, had lower values of SLA and foliar nutrients, and higher values of [C] than mobile dunes. The topsoil of fixed dunes had less [Ca] than in mobile dunes and this was reflected in foliar concentrations. The Mediterranean-subdesert dunes, had a distinct pattern of trait variation.
   Conclusion - Mediterranean-subdesert coastal dunes are characterized by lower values of leaf [N] and higher values of leaf [Ca] and [Fe] than in other Mediterranean ecosystems and by a broad correlation among SLA, leaf [N], [P] and [K]. Mediterranean-subdesert dunes showed a predominance of xerophytic malacophyllous strategy, whereas Mediterranean -oceanic dunes are dominated by stress tolerant species. Mobile dunes showed a leaf strategy closer to the observed on Mediterranean -subdesert dunes but with a relevantly higher leaf [Ca].
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 2032-3913
EI 2032-3921
PY 2015
VL 148
IS 1
BP 57
EP 67
DI 10.5091/plecevo.2015.951
SC Plant Sciences
UT WOS:000350785600007
ER

PT J
AU Sauterey, B
   Ward, BA
   Follows, MJ
   Bowler, C
   Claessen, D
AF Sauterey, Boris
   Ward, Ben A.
   Follows, Michael J.
   Bowler, Chris
   Claessen, David
TI When everything is not everywhere but species evolve: an alternative
   method to model adaptive properties of marine ecosystems
SO JOURNAL OF PLANKTON RESEARCH
DT Article
DE phytoplankton; competition; trait-based adaptive strategies; adaptive
   dynamics; eco-evolutionary dynamics; trade-off; community; global
   circulation model
ID RESOURCE COMPETITION; PREY COMMUNITIES; GLOBAL OCEAN; FOOD WEBS;
   CELL-SIZE; EVOLUTIONARY; PHYTOPLANKTON; DYNAMICS; PLANKTON; POPULATIONS
AB The functional and taxonomic biogeography of marine microbial systems reflects the current state of an evolving system. Current models of marine microbial systems and biogeochemical cycles do not reflect this fundamental organizing principle. Here, we investigate the evolutionary adaptive potential of marine microbial systems under environmental change and introduce explicit Darwinian adaptation into an ocean modelling framework, simulating evolving phytoplankton communities in space and time. To this end, we adopt tools from adaptive dynamics theory, evaluating the fitness of invading mutants over annual timescales, replacing the resident if a fitter mutant arises. Using the evolutionary framework, we examine how community assembly, specifically the emergence of phytoplankton cell size diversity, reflects the combined effects of bottom-up and top-down controls. When compared with a species-selection approach, based on the paradigm that "Everything is everywhere, but the environment selects", we show that (i) the selected optimal trait values are similar; (ii) the patterns emerging from the adaptive model are more robust, but (iii) the two methods lead to different predictions in terms of emergent diversity. We demonstrate that explicitly evolutionary approaches to modelling marine microbial populations and functionality are feasible and practical in time-varying, space-resolving settings and provide a new tool for exploring evolutionary interactions on a range of timescales in the ocean.
RI Ward, Ben/I-4776-2012; Claessen, David/S-7596-2017
OI Ward, Ben/0000-0003-1290-8270; Claessen, David/0000-0001-7354-1316;
   Sauterey, Boris/0000-0001-6164-756X; Bowler, Chris/0000-0003-3835-6187
TC 8
Z9 8
SN 0142-7873
EI 1464-3774
PD JAN-FEB
PY 2015
VL 37
IS 1
BP 28
EP 47
DI 10.1093/plankt/fbu078
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000350124100007
PM 25852217
ER

PT J
AU Boukhris, A
   Laffont-Schwob, I
   Mezghani, I
   El Kadri, L
   Prudent, P
   Pricop, A
   Tatoni, T
   Chaieb, M
AF Boukhris, Asma
   Laffont-Schwob, Isabelle
   Mezghani, Imed
   El Kadri, Lefi
   Prudent, Pascale
   Pricop, Anca
   Tatoni, Thierry
   Chaieb, Mohamed
TI Screening biological traits and fluoride contents of native vegetations
   in arid environments to select efficiently fluoride-tolerant native
   plant species for in-situ phytoremediation
SO CHEMOSPHERE
DT Article
DE Fluoride pollution; Pollutant tolerance; Functional traits;
   Phytostabilization
ID CONTAMINATED SOILS; SOUTHERN TUNISIA; ACCUMULATION; AVAILABILITY;
   DEGRADATION; SUITABILITY; SURFACES; L.
AB High fluoride pollution has been detected in the surrounding soils of the coastal superphosphate industries in the Gulf of Gabes (Southeast of Tunisia). A study was conducted in vicinity of factories analysing plant functional traits combined with plant fluoride accumulation and soil metal concentrations aiming to screen more efficiently native plant species tolerant to this pollution. Aerial parts of 18 plant species out of the 10 most abundant species per site were harvested on two polluted sites of Gabes and Skhira at the vicinity of the factories and on the less polluted site of Smara. Native plant species accumulated fluoride following the gradient of soil pollution. Fluoride contents of plant aerial parts ranged from 37 mg kg(-1) to 360 mg kg(-1) and five plant species were only found in the most polluted site. However these latter had low biomass and soil cover. Crossing biological traits and fluoride contents, a selection grid for potentially restorative plant species enabled the selection of three native perennials i.e. Rhanterium suaveolens, Atractylis serratuloides and, Erodium glaucophyllum as potential candidates for an in-situ phytoremediation program on arid fluoride-polluted sites. This approach may be used in other fluoride-polluted Mediterranean environments. (C) 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
RI Laffont-Schwob, Isabelle/G-9665-2012
OI Laffont-Schwob, Isabelle/0000-0003-3630-6450
TC 12
Z9 12
SN 0045-6535
EI 1879-1298
PD JAN
PY 2015
VL 119
BP 217
EP 223
DI 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2014.06.007
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000347739600030
PM 25014764
ER

PT J
AU Casolo, V
   Tomasella, M
   De Col, V
   Braidot, E
   Savi, T
   Nardini, A
AF Casolo, Valentino
   Tomasella, Martina
   De Col, Valentina
   Braidot, Enrico
   Savi, Tadeja
   Nardini, Andrea
TI Water relations of an invasive halophyte (Spartina patens):
   osmoregulation and ionic effects on xylem hydraulics
SO FUNCTIONAL PLANT BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE biomass; invasive plants; leaf hydraulics; nitrogen; osmotic potential;
   phenotypic plasticity
ID LEAF TRAIT RELATIONSHIPS; PHENOTYPIC PLASTICITY; GLOBAL METAANALYSIS;
   ALTERNIFLORA LOISEL; PLANT DIVERSITY; USE EFFICIENCY; SALT-MARSHES;
   ALIEN PLANTS; CONDUCTANCE; SALINITY
AB Spartina patens (Ait.) Muhl. is a grass native to the Atlantic coastal area of North America currently invading salt marsh ecosystems in several regions of Europe. We investigated leaf water relations and hydraulics, gas exchange, nitrogen and starch content in two populations of S. patens growing under contrasting salinity levels in a salt marsh and in a dune system in order to assess its functional plasticity as a factor contributing to its invasive potential. The analysis of leaf water relations revealed a suite of mechanisms adopted by S. patens to overcome salt and drought stress while maintaining relatively invariant leaf morphological traits and plant biomass. In particular, salt marsh plants experiencing severe water stress underwent greater osmoregulation and leaf hydraulic adjustment than dune plants. We also present the first experimental evidence for salt-mediated regulation of xylem hydraulic efficiency in a halophytic grass and suggest that it is an important functional trait allowing plants growing in saline habitats to cope with a restricted water supply. The functional plasticity of leaf water relations and xylem hydraulics emerges as a key trait underlying the competitive ability and invasive potential of S. patens.
RI Nardini, Andrea/C-6525-2009
OI Savi, Tadeja/0000-0001-7585-763X; BRAIDOT, Enrico/0000-0002-5415-3657;
   DE COL, Valentina/0000-0003-0895-969X; CASOLO,
   Valentino/0000-0003-4398-5519
TC 6
Z9 6
SN 1445-4408
EI 1445-4416
PY 2015
VL 42
IS 3
BP 264
EP 273
DI 10.1071/FP14172
SC Plant Sciences
UT WOS:000349635900005
ER

PT J
AU Bertocci, I
   Godino, JD
   Freitas, C
   Incera, M
   Araujo, R
   Bio, A
   Arenas, F
   Sousa-Pinto, I
   Reis, PA
   Dominguez, R
AF Bertocci, Iacopo
   Dominguez Godino, J.
   Freitas, C.
   Incera, M.
   Araujo, R.
   Bio, A.
   Arenas, F.
   Sousa-Pinto, I.
   Reis, P. A.
   Dominguez, R.
TI The regime of climate-related disturbance and nutrient enrichment
   modulate macroalgal invasions in rockpools
SO BIOLOGICAL INVASIONS
DT Article
DE Disturbance; Grateloupia turuturu; Mean intensity; Nutrient enrichment;
   Rocky intertidal; Sargassum muticum; Temporal variance
ID GRATELOUPIA-DORYPHORA HALYMENIACEAE; SARGASSUM-MUTICUM; MARINE
   ECOSYSTEMS; FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; OCEAN ACIDIFICATION; MEAN INTENSITY;
   SECONDARY SUCCESSION; INTRODUCED SEAWEEDS; COMMUNITY DIVERSITY;
   PROPAGULE PRESSURE
AB Patterns of invasion by the seaweeds Grateloupia turuturu Yamada and Sargassum muticum (Yendo) Fensholt under crossed combinations of the regime (mean intensity and temporal variability) of climate-related mechanical disturbance and constant nutrient enrichment were experimentally examined in rockpools in north Portugal. The cover of both species was larger under high compared to low intensity of disturbance, but this effect was enhanced by events more heterogeneously distributed over a period of 19 months. The invasion by G. turuturu was also larger in enriched pools, but only when disturbance was applied at high intensity. The richness of native taxa was increased by high intensity events of disturbance evenly distributed over time and by low intensity events heterogeneously distributed, while no differences were documented for other treatments. Temporal variability of disturbance and nutrients interactively affected the total cover of native taxa and the availability of bare rock in different directions. Enriched conditions increased the space occupancy by natives and reduced substratum availability only when associated to heterogeneous events of disturbance. At the same time, relatively more variable disturbances caused a reduced cover by native taxa and an increased availability of free space, but only under natural nutrient levels. Present findings contribute to understand the conditions that would be more likely to facilitate the spread of G. turuturu and S. muticum under current and predicted scenarios of compounded environmental changes and in relation to traits of recipient systems that are considered relevant for the success of invasions, including the native richness and the degree of usage of resources, i.e. primarily space.
RI Scientific Productivity, CIIMAR/N-6498-2017; Arenas,
   Francisco/M-7095-2015; Araujo, Rita/I-2964-2015; Scientific output,
   CIIMAR/E-5122-2012; Reis, Pedro/P-7244-2014
OI Scientific Productivity, CIIMAR/0000-0002-3703-4402; Arenas,
   Francisco/0000-0001-6925-3805; Araujo, Rita/0000-0001-8062-972X;
   Scientific output, CIIMAR/0000-0001-6270-2153; Reis,
   Pedro/0000-0001-5400-753X; Sousa Pinto, Isabel/0000-0002-9231-0553; Bio,
   Ana/0000-0003-4501-9410; Bertocci, Iacopo/0000-0002-1519-1677; DOMINGUEZ
   GODINO, JORGE ANTONIO/0000-0001-6413-7629
TC 9
Z9 9
SN 1387-3547
EI 1573-1464
PD JAN
PY 2015
VL 17
IS 1
BP 133
EP 147
DI 10.1007/s10530-014-0711-4
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000347526800016
ER

PT J
AU Barnett, A
   Meleder, V
   Blommaert, L
   Lepetit, B
   Gaudin, P
   Vyverman, W
   Sabbe, K
   Dupuy, C
   Lavaud, J
AF Barnett, Alexandre
   Meleder, Vona
   Blommaert, Lander
   Lepetit, Bernard
   Gaudin, Pierre
   Vyverman, Wim
   Sabbe, Koen
   Dupuy, Christine
   Lavaud, Johann
TI Growth form defines physiological photoprotective capacity in intertidal
   benthic diatoms
SO ISME JOURNAL
DT Article
ID VARIABLE CHLOROPHYLL FLUORESCENCE; XANTHOPHYLL-CYCLE; MICROPHYTOBENTHOS
   ASSEMBLAGES; PHAEODACTYLUM-TRICORNUTUM; PHOTOSYNTHETIC ACTIVITY;
   WESTERSCHELDE ESTUARY; VERTICAL MIGRATION; PLANKTONIC DIATOMS; MARINE
   DIATOMS; LIGHT
AB In intertidal marine sediments, characterized by rapidly fluctuating and often extreme light conditions, primary production is frequently dominated by diatoms. We performed a comparative analysis of photophysiological traits in 15 marine benthic diatom species belonging to the four major morphological growth forms (epipelon (EPL), motile epipsammon (EPM-M) and non-motile epipsammon (EPM-NM) and tychoplankton (TYCHO)) found in these sediments. Our analyses revealed a clear relationship between growth form and photoprotective capacity, and identified fast regulatory physiological photoprotective traits (that is, non-photochemical quenching (NPQ) and the xanthophyll cycle (XC)) as key traits defining the functional light response of these diatoms. EPM-NM and motile EPL showed the highest and lowest NPQ, respectively, with EPM-M showing intermediate values. Like EPL, TYCHO had low NPQ, irrespective of whether they were grown in benthic or planktonic conditions, reflecting an adaptation to a low light environment. Our results thus provide the first experimental evidence for the existence of a trade-off between behavioural (motility) and physiological photoprotective mechanisms (NPQ and the XC) in the four major intertidal benthic diatoms growth forms using unialgal cultures. Remarkably, although motility is restricted to the raphid pennate diatom clade, raphid pennate species, which have adopted a non-motile epipsammic or a tychoplanktonic life style, display the physiological photoprotective response typical of these growth forms. This observation underscores the importance of growth form and not phylogenetic relatedness as the prime determinant shaping the physiological photoprotective capacity of benthic diatoms.
RI Lavaud, Johann/N-6185-2014
OI Lavaud, Johann/0000-0002-4704-2502; Dupuy,
   Christine/0000-0002-5634-1336; Lepetit, Bernard/0000-0001-9980-9210;
   Meleder, Vona/0000-0002-1874-1929
TC 30
Z9 30
SN 1751-7362
EI 1751-7370
PD JAN
PY 2015
VL 9
IS 1
BP 32
EP 45
DI 10.1038/ismej.2014.105
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Microbiology
UT WOS:000348212800003
PM 25003964
ER

PT J
AU Stuart-Smith, RD
   Bates, AE
   Lefcheck, JS
   Duffy, JE
   Baker, SC
   Thomson, RJ
   Stuart-Smith, JF
   Hill, NA
   Kininmonth, SJ
   Airoldi, L
   Becerro, MA
   Campbell, SJ
   Dawson, TP
   Navarrete, SA
   Soler, G
   Strain, EMA
   Willis, TJ
   Edgar, GJ
AF Stuart-Smith, Rick D.
   Bates, Amanda E.
   Lefcheck, Jonathan S.
   Duffy, J. Emmett
   Baker, Susan C.
   Thomson, Russell J.
   Stuart-Smith, Jemina F.
   Hill, Nicole A.
   Kininmonth, Stuart J.
   Airoldi, Laura
   Becerro, Mikel A.
   Campbell, Stuart J.
   Dawson, Terence P.
   Navarrete, Sergio A.
   Soler, German
   Strain, Elisabeth M. A.
   Willis, Trevor J.
   Edgar, Graham J.
TI The potential of trait-based approaches to contribute to marine
   conservation
SO MARINE POLICY
DT Article
DE Evenness; Functional diversity; Macroecology; Marine fish; Reef
   ecosystems; Underwater visual census (UVC)
ID SPECIES-DIVERSITY; FISH ASSEMBLAGES; ABUNDANCE; HOTSPOTS; ECOLOGY; SOUTH
AB The value of diversity metrics to represent ecological communities and inform broad-scale conservation objectives and policy has often been subject to debate and uncertainty [1,2]. In practice, diversity metrics are important in setting management and conservation priorities, just as economic indices contribute to global monetary and financial policies. Thus, key challenges for ecologists are to identify new ways to view and summarise patterns in biodiversity and improve on the metrics available for management purposes. In a recent paper on functional diversity patterns in reef fishes [3], we highlighted the potential of new insights gained from functional trait-based approaches to inform marine management, stressing the need to develop and refine biodiversity measures that are linked to ecology (rather than taxonomy). We used a unique, fisheries-independent reef fish identity and abundance dataset, collected using standardised methods from equatorial to high latitude regions all over the world, to provide the first global view of the distribution of individuals amongst species (including a measure of evenness) and functional traits amongst marine communities. A recent paper by Robinson et al. [4] published in Marine Policy criticised the use of our evenness index as a measure of biodiversity, and questioned the use of functional trait-based metrics derived from surveys of standardised areas for decisions relating to broad-scale management of marine systems. In this paper we respond to Robinson et al. and rebut their claims related to sampling bias and broad-scale applicability of trait-based approaches. (C) 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
RI Dawson, Terence/E-4724-2011; Strain, Elisabeth/U-3520-2017; Thomson,
   Russell/H-5653-2012; Baker, Susan/F-9307-2011; Hill, Nicole/J-7856-2014
OI Dawson, Terence/0000-0002-4314-1378; Strain,
   Elisabeth/0000-0003-2165-9544; Thomson, Russell/0000-0003-4949-4120;
   Baker, Susan/0000-0002-7593-0267; Hill, Nicole/0000-0001-9329-6717;
   Becerro, Mikel/0000-0002-6047-350X; Wilis, Trevor/0000-0002-0357-1189;
   Kininmonth, Stuart/0000-0001-9198-3396; Lefcheck,
   Jonathan/0000-0002-8787-1786; Edgar, Graham/0000-0003-0833-9001
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0308-597X
EI 1872-9460
PD JAN
PY 2015
VL 51
BP 148
EP 150
DI 10.1016/j.marpol.2014.07.002
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; International Relations
UT WOS:000348003700017
ER

PT J
AU Plachno, BJ
   Adamec, L
   Kaminska, I
AF Plachno, Bartosz J.
   Adamec, Lubomir
   Kaminska, Iwona
TI Relationship between trap anatomy and function in Australian carnivorous
   bladderworts (Utricularia) of the subgenus Polypompholyx
SO AQUATIC BOTANY
DT Article
DE Lentibulariaceae; Amphibious carnivorous plant; Trap wall anatomy;
   Functional trap trait; Water aspiration; Trap resetting
ID LENTIBULARIACEAE; PLANTS
AB The suction traps of carnivorous Utricularia species are hollow bladders of foliar origin which trap and digest small organisms. In this paper, the trap wall anatomy and thickness in nine Australian Utricularia species belonging to three generic sections (Pleiochasia, Polypompholyx, Tridentaria) within the subgen. Polypompholyx are described. It is hypothesized that there is a close relationship between Utricularia trap wall anatomy and functional trap characteristics - species with more than two cell layers in their trap walls are less effective at trap firing (i.e., water aspiration) and resetting (water pumping) than species with two-layered trap walls. The trap walls of all Utricularia species studied using light microscopy consisted of two to five cell layers. A distinct variation in the trap wall structure occurred not only within one generic Utridularia section, but even within one species and also different parts of one trap. Using an electronic position sensor to monitor trap thickness showed that in two clones of Utricularia dichotoma, both firing (41 +/- 2 and 46 +/- 3 mu m mm(-1)) and resetting rates per unit trap length (14 +/- 1 mu m mm(-1) per 30 min) were markedly lower than the mean values for 13 aquatic Utricularia species obtained from the literature (73 +/- 2 and 52 +/- 21 mu m mm(-1), respectively). In conclusion, the number of cell layers in the trap wall may not in itself be decisive for the trap firing-resetting efficiency. The lag-period of water pumping by the trap, which can be caused by a different regulation mechanism of water pumping, is probably confined to the species from the Pleiochasia section in contrast to the aquatic species from the Utricularia section. (C) 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
RI Adamec, Lubomir/G-9970-2011
OI Plachno, Bartosz/0000-0001-5579-5101
TC 9
Z9 9
SN 0304-3770
EI 1879-1522
PD JAN
PY 2015
VL 120
BP 290
EP 296
DI 10.1016/j.aquabot.2014.09.008
PN B
SC Plant Sciences; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000347756100020
ER

PT J
AU Nevalainen, L
   Luoto, TP
   Manca, M
   Weisse, T
AF Nevalainen, Liisa
   Luoto, Tomi P.
   Manca, Marina
   Weisse, Thomas
TI A paleolimnological perspective on aquatic biodiversity in Austrian
   mountain lakes
SO AQUATIC SCIENCES
DT Article
DE Alpine lakes; Chironomidae; Cladocera; Ecological redundancy; Ecosystem
   functioning; Functional diversity
ID NIEDERE TAUERN ALPS; CLIMATE-CHANGE; FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; ALPINE LAKE;
   COMMUNITY COMPOSITION; SPECIES RICHNESS; ICE-AGE; CLADOCERA;
   ZOOPLANKTON; REMAINS
AB We assessed long-term aquatic biodiversity patterns, with a focus on functional diversity (FD), by using sedimentary Chironomidae and Cladocera assemblages in four mountain lakes in the Austrian Alps. The objectives were to detect whether the invertebrate communities exhibited similar recent diversity trends in climate-sensitive alpine lakes, to observe how lake-specific limnological shifts affect biodiversity, and to test the relationship between taxonomic diversity (TD) and FD for paleolimnological biodiversity evaluations. We applied traditional TD indices to the sedimentary assemblages and used an FD index that was based on functional traits of the encountered taxa of both invertebrate groups. There were some similar long-term trends in invertebrate FD and TD among the lakes; e.g. chironomid diversity increased in two lakes and cladoceran diversity in three lakes toward the twentieth and twenty-first century, but in general the diversity patterns were variable between lakes. Overall, FD had a positive relationship with TD suggesting that functionality can be used in paleolimnological studies as a measure of biodiversity. However, cladoceran taxon richness did not correlate with FD in two lakes suggesting that TD is not always a surrogate for FD. Furthermore, TD of chironomids tended to increase more pronouncedly than FD in the top core sections indicating that increasing TD does not necessarily enhance FD and that different taxonomic entities may play similar functional roles in ecosystems. Accordingly, when evaluating biodiversity and ecological redundancy, functionality of the species pool should be carefully considered and highlighted also in paleolimnological research.
OI Weisse, Thomas/0000-0001-6103-6558; Nevalainen,
   Liisa/0000-0001-6837-8753; Luoto, Tomi/0000-0001-6925-3688
TC 5
Z9 5
SN 1015-1621
EI 1420-9055
PD JAN
PY 2015
VL 77
IS 1
BP 59
EP 69
DI 10.1007/s00027-014-0363-6
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000347149700006
ER

PT J
AU Chessman, BC
AF Chessman, Bruce C.
TI Relationships between lotic macroinvertebrate traits and responses to
   extreme drought
SO FRESHWATER BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE climate change; drought; macroinvertebrate; river; trait
ID MURRAY-DARLING BASIN; SOUTH-EASTERN AUSTRALIA; 2 INTERMITTENT STREAMS;
   HYPOXIC BLACKWATER EVENT; AQUATIC INSECTS; BIG DRY; COMMUNITY STRUCTURE;
   MILLENNIUM DROUGHT; FAUNAL COMPOSITION; FUNCTIONAL-ASPECTS
AB The prospect of increasing drought intensity in many river basins under climate change threatens the persistence of vulnerable freshwater species. Understanding how the traits of each species affect its resistance and resilience to drought may help to identify those species at most risk and elucidate the mechanisms by which impacts occur. I analysed macroinvertebrate monitoring data collected from rivers across Australia's Murray-Darling Basin (>10(6)km(2)) during the middle and later stages of the recent decade-long Millennium Drought and the initial post-drought period. I tested the ability of eight traits, expressing aspects of life history, diet and environmental tolerance, to explain changes in the broad-scale prevalence (the proportion of sites with observed presence) of macroinvertebrate families during and after the drought. The rate of basin-scale change in the riverine macroinvertebrate assemblage was least in the final stages of the drought. Immediately after the drought, the assemblage did not shift back towards its mid-drought state but instead moved further away. Eleven families that had a statistically significant fall in prevalence during the drought did not increase afterwards. Negative responses to drought were associated with slower maturation, absence of atmospheric respiration, high rheophily and low thermophily. Positive responses to cessation of drought were associated with having a holometabolous life cycle, greater requirements for dissolved oxygen, high rheophily and low thermophily. Because several traits were related to drought vulnerability, management to mitigate the adverse ecological effects of future droughts should consider a number of mechanisms by which drought has an effect. These include a loss of flowing water that supports rheophilous species, inadequate duration of wetting for species with a long aquatic phase, and effects of high temperature and hypoxia on species requiring cool conditions and well-aerated water. A revival of research on the life histories of freshwater invertebrate species and more information on oxygen requirements and temperature and desiccation tolerance are needed to improve our ability to predict the effects of drought.
TC 28
Z9 29
SN 0046-5070
EI 1365-2427
PD JAN
PY 2015
VL 60
IS 1
BP 50
EP 63
DI 10.1111/fwb.12466
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000346069800004
ER

PT J
AU Angela, CB
   Javier, CJ
   Teresa, GM
   Marisa, MH
AF Angela, Caro-Borrero
   Javier, Carmona-Jimenez
   Teresa, Gonzalez-Martinez
   Marisa, Mazari-Hiriart
TI Hydrological evaluation of a peri-urban stream and its impact on
   ecosystem services potential
SO GLOBAL ECOLOGY AND CONSERVATION
DT Article
DE Hydrological alterations; Peri-urban sub-basin; Basin management;
   Aquatic biodiversity; Ecosystem services
AB Rivers are aquatic systems with a unidirectional flow. These systems are highly diverse habitats that support a great variety of organisms, which vary in shape and function, and sustain a diverse range of hydrological ecosystem services (HESs). The HESs provided by rivers varies based on complex hydro-geomorphological dynamics and their relationship with the functional processes of the basin. Land use changes in transition zones, where ecosystem functions are compromised, affect the basin, especially basins close to or on the periphery of urban areas. Such is the case for Mexico City, where 60 m(3) of water is consumed per second, 30% of which is imported from outside sources.
   The rivers of the Magdalena-Eslava sub-basin are among the few remaining surficial water sources in Mexico City. These rivers are located in an area classified as a Soil Conservation Zone, which has been intensely managed for decades. The aims of this paper are (1) to perform a hydrological evaluation of two urban streams and identify their relationship with the provision of hydrological ecosystem services via (i) a hydraulic balance analysis, (ii) a hydro-geomorphological characterization of each stream, (iii) an estimate of present and potential hydraulic erosion, (iv) the determination of physicochemical and bacteriological parameters and (v) a description of macroinvertebrates, macroalgae and their habitats in order to (2) identify the impacts of socio-economic dynamics on the responses of this rural-urban lotic system. Our results show that water flow, forest cover and hydro-geomorphologic heterogeneity are key to sustaining ecosystem functioning, especially in the high and middle sections of the basin. The highest potential provision of water for direct use was recorded in the sub-basin's middle section; however, the stream channels in that section have lost their natural water flow due to a water management infrastructure built to regulate flow during the rainy season. This intervention can be viewed as a regulation of HESs as water management infrastructure alters the transport of sediment and reduces available natural habitat. The provision of quality water in the lower area of the sub-basin has been seriously compromised by the establishment of illegal urban settlements. A relationship between biologically diverse ecological traits and their response capabilities was established and can be considered an indicator of current HES potential. Therefore, this sub-basin may constitute an example of good management and maximizing potential HESs in an urban-rural setting based on improved management strategies that could be applied in other developing nations. (C) 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
OI Gonzalez Martinez, Teresa Margarita/0000-0003-1629-5184
TC 6
Z9 7
SN 2351-9894
PD JAN
PY 2015
VL 3
BP 628
EP 644
DI 10.1016/j.gecco.2015.02.008
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000416220000052
ER

PT J
AU Luoto, TP
   Nevalainen, L
AF Luoto, Tomi P.
   Nevalainen, Liisa
TI Climate-forced patterns in midge feeding guilds
SO HYDROBIOLOGIA
DT Article
DE Climate change; Functional diversity; Macrobenthos; Paleolimnology;
   Spatial distribution
ID SOUTHERN FINLAND; ICE-AGE; MACROINVERTEBRATE COMMUNITIES; CHIRONOMIDAE
   INSECTA; ECOLOGICAL INTEGRITY; AQUATIC INSECTS; LAND-USE; LAKE;
   BIODIVERSITY; TEMPERATURE
AB Feeding behavior of macroinvertebrates is significant in determining aquatic ecosystem functioning. However, there is a lack of knowledge on the distribution of feeding guilds, and in particular on the influence of climate on the feeding functions at large spatial and long temporal scales. In this study, lakes at different climatic zones are examined for modern abundances of midge (Diptera) feeding guilds to establish the relationships between the feeding functions and climate. In addition, 11,000-year and 700-year sediment core records are investigated for their midge feeding guilds to establish their long-term relationships with climate changes. The results indicated that feeding guilds had a significant relationship with air temperature in the modern dataset and similar climate-related patterns in trait abundances had also occurred during the important climatic intervals of the past. In addition, the long-term records agreed with the modern spatial dataset in that feeding guild diversity was decreased under warm and cold climate compared to intermediate climate conditions. The results of this study are significant in demonstrating the influence of climate on the functioning of aquatic ecosystems and in providing valuable information on long-term variability in feeding functions that is needed to better understand future changes under the ongoing climate change.
OI Luoto, Tomi/0000-0001-6925-3688; Nevalainen, Liisa/0000-0001-6837-8753
TC 6
Z9 6
SN 0018-8158
EI 1573-5117
PD JAN
PY 2015
VL 742
IS 1
BP 141
EP 152
DI 10.1007/s10750-014-1973-7
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000344606400011
ER

PT J
AU Murray, F
   Douglas, A
   Solan, M
AF Murray, Fiona
   Douglas, Alex
   Solan, Martin
TI Species that share traits do not necessarily form distinct and
   universally applicable functional effect groups
SO MARINE ECOLOGY PROGRESS SERIES
DT Article
DE Functional groups; Functional traits; Ecosystem function; Functional
   diversity; Bioturbation; Bioirrigation
ID ECOSYSTEM FUNCTION; IN-SITU; SEDIMENT REWORKING; MARINE BENTHOS;
   BIODIVERSITY; DIVERSITY; BIOTURBATION; NITROGEN; COMMUNITY; GUILDS
AB Recent studies considering the contribution of biodiversity to ecosystem functioning have emphasised the functional importance of individual species and, in so doing, have rekindled the use of categorical descriptors that group species according to their relative contribution to ecosystem processes or functioning. Such functional effect groupings, however, tend to be based on specific traits or contributory roles that are assumed to adequately characterise the functional importance of a species, rather than being based on direct measures of ecosystem processes and functions. This decoupling of organism-environment interaction is difficult to reconcile and, when applied widely, distorts understanding of the mediating role that species play in natural ecosystems. In this study, we begin to address this problem by characterising the functional contributions of 7 benthic invertebrate species for 2 ecosystem processes (particle reworking and bioirrigation) linked to 4 ecosystem functions (changing concentrations of NH4-N, NOx-N, PO4-P and SiO2-Si) and use these data to derive functional effect groupings. We show that whilst it is possible to categorise species according to how they influence ecosystem properties, the membership and number of functional effect groups depends on which ecosystem property is considered. Furthermore, we demonstrate that categorisations based on functional effects are not synonymous with species taxonomy and that they cannot be applied generically even when considering closely linked biogeochemical processes. Collectively, our findings call for a rethink of how functional effect groups are defined and emphasise the need to interrogate presumed links between species and ecosystem properties across a range of biodiversity-environment contexts.
OI Murray, Fiona/0000-0003-3312-0175; Solan, Martin/0000-0001-9924-5574
TC 16
Z9 16
SN 0171-8630
EI 1616-1599
PD DEC 3
PY 2014
VL 516
BP 23
EP 34
DI 10.3354/meps11020
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology;
   Oceanography
UT WOS:000346418900003
ER

PT J
AU Ricotta, C
   Acosta, ATR
AF Ricotta, C.
   Acosta, A. T. R.
TI On the functional diversity of partially distinct species: some theory
   and a practical example
SO COMMUNITY ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE Equivalent number of species; Functional traits; Mean species
   dissimilarity; Rao's Quadratic diversity; Sand dune ecosystems
ID ENVIRONMENTAL GRADIENTS; PHYLOGENETIC DIVERSITY; PARTITIONING DIVERSITY;
   COASTAL DUNES; PATTERNS; EVENNESS; COMMUNITIES; ENTROPY; BIODIVERSITY;
   COMPONENTS
AB Due to its nonlinearity with respect to species addition, some applications of the Rao quadratic diversity are meaningful only if they are first transformed into their equivalent number of species, which is the theoretical species richness of a maximally distinct and perfectly even community with the same diversity as the original community. In this paper, relaxing the requirement of maximal distinction among species, we generalize the notion of the equivalent number of species for the Rao diversity to partially distinct species. The biological meaning of this proposal is illustrated with one dedicated case study in sand dune communities in Italy. According to our results, the proposed approach proved appropriate for comparing the functional diversity of different plant communities with varying levels of environmental constraints.
RI Acosta, Alicia T. R,/E-3653-2012
OI Acosta, Alicia T. R,/0000-0001-6572-3187; RICOTTA,
   Carlo/0000-0003-0818-3959
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 1585-8553
EI 1588-2756
PD DEC
PY 2014
VL 15
IS 2
BP 205
EP 211
DI 10.1556/COMEC.15.2014.2.9
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000348706700009
ER

PT J
AU Brand, C
   Miserendino, ML
AF Brand, Cecilia
   Laura Miserendino, Maria
TI Biological traits and community patterns of Trichoptera at two
   Patagonian headwater streams affected by volcanic ash deposition
SO ZOOLOGICAL STUDIES
DT Article
DE Disturbance; Caddisflies; Volcanic ash; Traits; Total suspended solids;
   Patagonia
ID FINE SEDIMENT; NEW-ZEALAND; MACROINVERTEBRATE COMMUNITIES; INSECT
   COMMUNITIES; BENTHIC INVERTEBRATES; LAND-USE; ARGENTINA; ERUPTION;
   DRIFT; DISTURBANCE
AB Background: Sediment deposition constitutes a major disturbance having negative effects on aquatic ecosystems. The Chaiten Volcano eruption occurred on May 2008. As a consequence, broad areas along the Argentine Andes (40 degrees S to 46 degrees S) were covered with ash. This event provided an excellent opportunity to investigate how a natural and exceptional sedimentation episode affects Trichoptera communities.
   Results: We assessed changes in caddisfly community attributes (composition, density and diversity) and 11 biological traits, by comparing pre-eruption (May 2007 to April 2008) and post-eruption (July 2008 to March 2010) data at two headwater streams. As a consequence of the event, total suspended solids increased and Trichoptera richness and density significantly diminished. By March 2010, two common species of Hydroptilidae (Metrichia patagonica and Metrichia neotropicalis) were no longer recorded at one site; while species richness and density values were still low indicating that the community had not recovered. Scrapers, shredders, and predators were among the most affected functional feeding groups and changes in their relative abundance were tracked in subsequent years after the ashfall event.
   Conclusions: In this study, species tolerance to sedimentation was related to certain traits such as poorly synchronized life history, filter-feeding habits, rounded body shape, tegument respiration mode, and poorly sclerotized life forms.
TC 5
Z9 5
SN 1021-5506
EI 1810-522X
PD DEC
PY 2014
VL 53
AR UNSP 72
DI 10.1186/s40555-014-0072-9
SC Zoology
UT WOS:000347518600003
ER

PT J
AU David, AA
   Simon, CA
AF David, Andrew A.
   Simon, Carol A.
TI The effect of temperature on larval development of two non-indigenous
   poecilogonous polychaetes (Annelida: Spionidae) with implications for
   life history theory, establishment and range expansion
SO JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL MARINE BIOLOGY AND ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE Adelphophagy; Aquaculture; Boccardia proboscidea; Planktotrophy;
   Polydora hoplura
ID BOCCARDIA-PROBOSCIDEA ANNELIDA; MARINE BENTHIC INVERTEBRATES;
   SOUTH-AFRICA; CULTURED ABALONE; FOOD AVAILABILITY; HALIOTIS-MIDAE;
   NORTH-AMERICA; CAPITELLA SP; SIZE; POLYDORA
AB Marine invasions are recognized as an important threat to global biodiversity and predicting the establishment and spread of an introduced species can aid in management efforts to mitigate the damage incurred by these species. In South Africa, the recently introduced polychaete Boccardia proboscidea has been recorded at the outflow of abalone farms where they are known to infest the shells of these mollusks. To determine if B. proboscidea can become established along the South African coast and subsequently expand its range, we assessed brood size, larval size at hatching, larval survivorship and developmental time and rate of this species under temperature regimes reflective of those found along the coast. We also investigated similar temperature dependent development in the well-established non-indigenous shell borer Polydora hoplura which can serve as a proxy for our predictions. Worms were cultured in glass capillary tubes at five different temperature treatments (12 degrees C, 17 degrees C, 21 degrees C, 24 degrees C, 28 degrees C) and planktotrophic and adelphophagic larvae were tracked from oviposition to settlement. We found that in P. hoplura, females producing adelphophagic larvae had smaller broods at the highest temperature treatment and higher temperatures resulted in significantly larger sizes at hatching. Survivorship of planktotrophic and adelphophagic larvae was highest at the intermediate to high temperature treatments (21 degrees C and 24 degrees C) and was generally lower at the lower temperatures (12 degrees C and 17 degrees C). Temperature had no significant effect on brood size of B. pro boscidea whereas higher temperatures resulted in larger hatching sizes for planktotrophic and adelphophagic larvae. In B. proboscidea, larval types showed differences in survival optima with planktotrophic larvae exhibiting its highest survivorship at the colder temperatures and lowest at the warmer temperatures while adelphophagic larvae had its highest survivorship at 21 degrees C and its lowest at the extreme temperatures. There was a positive relationship between temperature and developmental rate for both species. The difference in larval sizes of the non-feeding planktotrophic larvae of B. proboscidea was attributed to a growth window that allowed for variability in reproductive traits based on exogenous factors such as temperature. More importantly, the results indicate that B. pro boscidea will be capable of producing viable populations at different localities along the South African coast including those where P. hoplura has already been established. (C) 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
OI Simon, Carol/0000-0001-9613-5222
TC 12
Z9 12
SN 0022-0981
EI 1879-1697
PD DEC
PY 2014
VL 461
BP 20
EP 30
DI 10.1016/j.jembe.2014.07.012
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000346894900003
ER

PT J
AU Semprucci, F
   Balsamo, M
   Frontalini, F
AF Semprucci, Federica
   Balsamo, Maria
   Frontalini, Fabrizio
TI The nematode assemblage of a coastal lagoon (Lake Varano, southern
   Italy): ecology and biodiversity patterns
SO SCIENTIA MARINA
DT Article
DE free-living nematodes; biodiversity; transitional environment;
   ecological quality; Lake Varano
ID ADRIATIC SEA; COMMUNITY STRUCTURE; MARINE NEMATODES; MEIOBENTHIC
   COMMUNITIES; INTERTIDAL NEMATODES; MATURITY INDEX; HEAVY-METALS;
   INDIAN-OCEAN; MEIOFAUNA; SEDIMENT
AB This study was conducted in Lake Varano (southern Italy) in order to determine the environmental parameters that influence nematode taxonomic and functional diversity and how they influence them, and to classify for the first time the ecological quality status of a transitional environment. The general composition and level of taxonomic diversity were comparable with those reported for transitional environments worldwide. Principal component analysis revealed that the main environmental factors controlling the assemblages in terms of both composition and biological traits were grain size, organic matter, pollution load index and, only secondarily, salinity. Molgolaimus allgeni, Terschellingia longicaudata and Leptolaimus luridus showed higher values in relation to silt, organic matter and pollution load index, while Axonolaimus caudostriatus, Odontophora wieseri, Paramonhystera pellucida and Paracanthonchus longicaudatus showed higher values in relation to the redox potential and sand percentage. Salinity was detected as an influencing parameter only secondarily and particularly for Calomicrolaimus honestus, Daptonema normandicum, Thalassomonhystera parva and Sabatieria pulchra. With respect to functional traits, the trophic groups seemed to be mainly related to sediment type, which is in turn reflected by the nature of the available food. The maturity index, as well as c-p classes, did not always permit a clear interpretation of the interaction between anthropogenic and natural factors. However, the greater influence of the San Antonino and San Francesco Canals was perfectly revealed by the nematode assemblage. In accordance with the current ecological quality classes, Lake Varano can mainly be classified as having good to poor ecological quality status.
RI Semprucci, Federica/N-5889-2014; Frontalini, Fabrizio/C-4819-2008
OI Semprucci, Federica/0000-0003-1360-7242; Frontalini,
   Fabrizio/0000-0002-0425-9306
TC 18
Z9 19
SN 0214-8358
EI 1886-8134
PD DEC
PY 2014
VL 78
IS 4
BP 579
EP 588
DI 10.3989/scimar.04018.02A
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000346153200012
ER

PT J
AU Viglino, M
   Flores, DA
   Ercoli, MD
   Alvarez, A
AF Viglino, M.
   Flores, D. A.
   Ercoli, M. D.
   Alvarez, A.
TI Patterns of morphological variation of the vertebral column in dolphins
SO JOURNAL OF ZOOLOGY
DT Article
DE axial skeleton; Delphinidae; Pontoporiidae; vertebral morphology
ID CETACEANS; DELPHINIDAE; PHYLOGENIES; COMPLEXITY; OSTEOLOGY; EVOLUTION;
   WHALES
AB Cetaceans swim by the alternate action of their epiaxial and hypaxial muscles and their propulsive movements are confined to the vertical plane. Changes in the shape and mechanical properties of vertebrae strongly affect their function during oscillatory swimming. The first objective of this study was to provide a quantitative characterization of vertebral morphology in representatives of the Delphinidae and Pontoporiidae families. A novel morphometric approach was applied, using nine vertebral measurements and three indices. The second objective was to assess the relationship between morphology and both habitat and size through regression analyses. The phylogenetic structure of the distribution of characters was also explored by estimating phylogenetic signal. No relationship was found between morphology and habitat or size, but vertebral measurements and indices showed a significant phylogenetic signal. Morphological profiles indicated that coastal and oceanic delphinid species had a conservative regionalization of the vertebral column. All delphinid species showed discoidal centra morphology, while Pontoporia blainvillei presented a spool-shaped morphology. Differences in vertebral morphology and inferred muscular architecture between P.blainvillei and delphinids could indicate distinct dynamics of vertebral movement during swimming. However, other complex and specific functional relationships and life-history traits may also be influencing vertebral morphology. The detailed study of the complex evolutionary history of lineages could bring to light other clarifying dimensions for understanding morphological evolution in odontocetes.
TC 5
Z9 5
SN 0952-8369
EI 1469-7998
PD DEC
PY 2014
VL 294
IS 4
BP 267
EP 277
DI 10.1111/jzo.12177
SC Zoology
UT WOS:000346091200007
ER

PT J
AU da Cunha, NL
   Fischer, E
   Lorenz-Lemke, AP
   Barrett, SCH
AF da Cunha, Nicolay Leme
   Fischer, Erich
   Lorenz-Lemke, Aline P.
   Barrett, Spencer C. H.
TI Floral variation and environmental heterogeneity in a tristylous clonal
   aquatic of the Pantanal wetlands of Brazil
SO ANNALS OF BOTANY
DT Article
DE Clonal propagation; Eichhornia azurea; environmental heterogeneity;
   flooding regimes; floral variation; Pontederiaceae; sexual reproduction;
   style morph ratios; tristyly
ID PONTEDERIA-CORDATA PONTEDERIACEAE; ANISOPLETHIC POPULATION-STRUCTURE;
   DECODON-VERTICILLATUS LYTHRACEAE; EICHHORNIA-AZUREA PONTEDERIACEAE;
   SWARTZ KUNTH PONTEDERIACEAE; TRIMORPHIC INCOMPATIBILITY; SEXUAL
   REPRODUCTION; PLANT-POPULATIONS; LYTHRUM-SALICARIA; WATER HYACINTH
AB Background and Aims The balance between stochastic forces and frequency-dependent mating largely governs style morph frequencies in heterostylous populations. In clonal species, deviations from equal morph ratios often result from founder events and unfavourable conditions for sexual reproduction. The aim of this study was to investigate whether different flooding regimes, because of their influence on sexual vs. clonal reproduction, are associated with regional variation in morph frequencies and floral trait differentiation in populations of the clonal, tristylous, aquatic Eichhornia azurea (Pontederiaceae) in the Pantanal wetlands of Brazil.
   Methods Style morph frequencies were sampled from 73 populations distributed across four flooding regimes differing in depth and duration. Measurements of flower size, sex-organ dimension, pollen size and pollen production were made in selected populations, and pollinator assemblages and their functional traits were recorded.
   Key Results Most populations of E. azurea were tristylous (78 %), but the majority exhibited uneven morph ratios. The frequency of the mid-styled morph was significantly lower than that of the long-and short-styled morphs. Morph evenness was positively associated with population size but not with flooding regime. There were significant phenotypic differences among flooding regimes for all floral traits, including populations with reduced flower size, sex-organ length and smaller pollen. Pollinator assemblages varied with flood duration.
   Conclusions The similar morph structure and evenness of populations, regardless of flooding regime, suggest that sexual reproduction and clonal dispersal are sufficiently common to prevent the signature of founder events from dominating in a region. However, the pervasive occurrence of biased morph ratios in most populations suggests that many are in a non-equilibrium state. The reduced frequency of the mid-styled morph in trimorphic and dimorphic populations may be associated with the weak self-incompatibility of this morph resulting in selfing and inbreeding depression. Clonality in E. azurea and the weak self-incompatibility of the mid-styled morph may make it more vulnerable to geitonogamous selfing.
RI Lorenz-Lemke, Aline/I-1743-2012; Cunha, Nicolay/D-3212-2012
OI Cunha, Nicolay/0000-0001-5509-6757; Fischer, Erich/0000-0001-8722-9876
TC 5
Z9 5
SN 0305-7364
EI 1095-8290
PD DEC
PY 2014
VL 114
IS 8
BP 1637
EP 1649
DI 10.1093/aob/mcu181
SC Plant Sciences
UT WOS:000345825300006
PM 25180289
ER

PT J
AU Cavalli, G
   Baattrup-Pedersen, A
   Riis, T
AF Cavalli, Giulia
   Baattrup-Pedersen, Annette
   Riis, Tenna
TI The role of species functional traits in distributional patterns of
   lowland stream vegetation
SO FRESHWATER SCIENCE
DT Article
DE abundance patterns; disturbance; eutrophication; resilience; weed
   cutting; aquatic plants; macrophyte; COIA analyses
ID RANGE SIZE RELATIONSHIPS; PLANT-COMMUNITIES; MACROPHYTE COMMUNITIES;
   REGIONAL DISTRIBUTION; ENVIRONMENTAL-FACTORS; DANISH STREAMS; ABUNDANCE;
   ECOLOGY; RICHNESS; DYNAMICS
AB Aquatic macrophytes suffer from widespread and profound habitat deterioration that has led to dramatic changes in species distributional patterns. We explored linkages between species functional traits and abundance patterns by analyzing mean community trait values in 1083 Danish lowland streams. We expected that widespread macrophytes would share common traits and that species with smaller ranges would be negatively associated with these traits. We selected 11 traits to characterize the ecological features of 52 amphibious and submerged species. We examined the relationships between species abundance and species traits with multivariate ordination and coinertia analysis (COIA), and identified groups of species with similar distributional patterns and ecological traits by hierarchical cluster analysis. Local abundance and geographical range size of submerged and amphibious species were significantly positively related. Species abundance and species traits tables were significantly correlated, and species were separated into 5 groups based on life form, productivity, meristem characteristics, ability to fragment, and the size of the root-rhizome system. Widespread plant species in Danish lowland streams shared common traits, such as meristem, dispersal, and productivity characteristics, and we infer that these traits are likely to have adaptive value in eutrophic and hydromorphologically disturbed habitats. On the other hand, species with narrower range sizes were characterized by a different set of trait characteristics. We conclude that species abundance and distribution patterns are closely correlated with ecological trait characteristics and that traits associated with resilience to anthropogenic disturbance confer success in Danish streams.
RI Riis, Tenna/K-8346-2013
OI Riis, Tenna/0000-0003-2501-4444
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 2161-9549
EI 2161-9565
PD DEC
PY 2014
VL 33
IS 4
BP 1074
EP 1085
DI 10.1086/678048
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000344922000006
ER

PT J
AU Sara, G
   Rinaldi, A
   Montalto, V
AF Sara, Gianluca
   Rinaldi, Alessandro
   Montalto, Valeria
TI Thinking beyond organism energy use: a trait-based bioenergetic
   mechanistic approach for predictions of life history traits in marine
   organisms
SO MARINE ECOLOGY-AN EVOLUTIONARY PERSPECTIVE
DT Article
DE Dynamic energy budget model; functional trait-based bioenergetic
   approach; life history traits; marine ectotherms
ID BUDGET DEB MODEL; CLIMATE-CHANGE; BRACHIDONTES-PHARAONIS;
   CRASSOSTREA-GIGAS; ECOLOGICAL NICHE; PACIFIC OYSTER; STRESS;
   PARAMETERIZATION; TEMPERATURE; TOLERANCE
AB The functional trait-based bioenergetic approach is emergent in many ecological spectra, from the conservation of natural resources to mitigation and adaptation strategies in a global climate change context. Such an approach relies on being able to exploit mechanistic rules to connect environmental human-induced variability to functional traits (i.e. all those specific traits defining species in terms of their ecological roles) and use these to provide estimates of species life history traits (LH; e. g. body size, fecundity per life span, number of reproductive events). LHs are species-specific and proximate determinants of population characteristics in a certain habitat. They represent the most valuable quantitative information to investigate how broad potential distributional boundaries of a species are, and to feed predictive population models. There is much to be found in the current literature that describes mechanistic functional trait-based bioenergetics models, using them to test ecological hypotheses, but a mathematical framework often renders interpretation and use complicated. Here, we wanted to present a simpler interpretation and description of one of the most important recent mechanistic bioenergetic theories: the dynamic energy budget theory by Kooijman (Dynamic Energy Budget Theory for Metabolic Organisation, 2010, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge). Our main aim was to disentangle those aspects that at first reading may seem too mathematically challenging to many marine biologists, ecologists and environmental scientists, and present them for use in mechanistic applications.
OI SARA', Gianluca/0000-0002-7658-5274
TC 22
Z9 22
SN 0173-9565
EI 1439-0485
PD DEC
PY 2014
VL 35
IS 4
BP 506
EP 515
DI 10.1111/maec.12106
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000345270900010
ER

PT J
AU Fu, H
   Zhong, JY
   Yuan, GX
   Xie, P
   Guo, LG
   Zhang, XL
   Xu, J
   Li, ZQ
   Li, W
   Zhang, M
   Cao, T
   Ni, LY
AF Fu, Hui
   Zhong, Jiayou
   Yuan, Guixiang
   Xie, Ping
   Guo, Longgen
   Zhang, Xiaolin
   Xu, Jun
   Li, Zhongqianng
   Li, Wei
   Zhang, Meng
   Cao, Te
   Ni, Leyi
TI Trait-based community assembly of aquatic macrophytes along a water
   depth gradient in a freshwater lake
SO FRESHWATER BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE aquatic macrophytes; functional trait; habitat filtering; niche
   differentiation; trait-environment relationships
ID FUNCTIONAL TRAITS; ENVIRONMENTAL GRADIENT; ECOSYSTEM SERVICES;
   PLANT-COMMUNITIES; BIODIVERSITY LOSS; CURRENT KNOWLEDGE; AMAZONIAN
   FOREST; ECOLOGY; COMPETITION; FRAMEWORK
AB <list list-type="1" id="fwb12443-list-0001"> Trait-based approaches provide a framework for integrating the distribution of functional traits associated with ecological strategies into the responses of plant community dynamics along environmental gradients. We used a trait-based approach to unravel the processes governing macrophyte community assembly along a water depth gradient. We sampled 42 plots and 1513 individual plants and measured 12 functional traits and abundance of 17 macrophyte species. The results showed significant evidences of habitat filtering (i.e. a significant reduction in the range and variance of trait values) and of niche differentiation (i.e. trait values distributed more evenly than expected), both of which affected the functional responses of macrophyte communities associated with different sets of traits in significant different patterns along the gradient. Habitat filtering effects increased significantly for specific leaf area and leaf carbon content along the gradient. Niche differentiation effects increased significantly for leaf dry mass content, but decreased for ramet size, shoot height and leaf carbon content with increasing water depth, implying that the relative strength of biotic competition in a specific functional niche would vary with water depth. Intraspecific trait variability promoted significantly the detection of habitat filtering effects on stem diameter, lamina thickness and stem dry mass content, and niche differentiation effects on specific leaf area, leaf dry mass content, shoot height, stem diameter, stem dry mass content and ramet size. Community assembly processes shape the functional trait distribution within communities along environmental gradients through hierarchical effects of habitat filtering and niche differentiation. Our study highlights that niche differentiation plays a structuring role in macrophyte community assembly and that intraspecific trait variability is an important factor influencing macrophyte community dynamics. <doi origin="wiley" registered="yes">10.1111/(ISSN)1365-2427</doi
TC 13
Z9 15
SN 0046-5070
EI 1365-2427
PD DEC
PY 2014
VL 59
IS 12
BP 2462
EP 2471
DI 10.1111/fwb.12443
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000344778800003
ER

PT J
AU Hecht, BC
   Valle, ME
   Thrower, FP
   Nichols, KM
AF Hecht, Benjamin C.
   Valle, Madeline E.
   Thrower, Frank P.
   Nichols, Krista M.
TI Divergence in Expression of Candidate Genes for the Smoltification
   Process Between Juvenile Resident Rainbow and Anadromous Steelhead Trout
SO MARINE BIOTECHNOLOGY
DT Article
DE Gene expression; Maturation; Migration; Smoltification; Trout
ID SALMON SALMO-SALAR; PARR-SMOLT TRANSFORMATION; GROWTH-FACTOR-I;
   ZEBRAFISH DANIO-RERIO; TIME RT-PCR; ONCORHYNCHUS-MYKISS; ATLANTIC
   SALMON; SEAWATER ADAPTATION; CHINOOK SALMON; PACIFIC SALMON
AB Rainbow and steelhead trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss), among other salmonid fishes, exhibit tremendous life history diversity, foremost of which is variation in migratory propensity. While some individuals possess the ability to undertake an anadromous marine migration, others remain resident in freshwater throughout their life cycle. Those that will migrate undergo tremendous physiological, morphological, and behavioral transformations in a process called smoltification which transitions freshwater-adapted parr to marine-adapted smolts. While the behavior, ecology, and physiology of smoltification are well described, our understanding of the proximate genetic mechanisms that trigger the process are not well known. Quantitative genetic analyses have identified several genomic regions associated with smoltification and migration-related traits within this species. Here we investigate the divergence in gene expression of 18 functional and positional candidate genes for the smoltification process in the brain, gill, and liver tissues of migratory smolts, resident parr, and precocious mature male trout at the developmental stage of out-migration. Our analysis reveals several genes differentially expressed between life history classes and validates the candidate nature of several genes in the parr-smolt transformation including Clock1 alpha, FSH beta, GR, GH2, GHR1, GHR2, NDK7, p53, SC6a7, Taldo1, THR alpha, THR beta, and Vdac2.
TC 5
Z9 5
SN 1436-2228
EI 1436-2236
PD DEC
PY 2014
VL 16
IS 6
BP 638
EP 656
DI 10.1007/s10126-014-9579-7
SC Biotechnology & Applied Microbiology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000344543800003
PM 24952010
ER

PT J
AU Fernandez, C
   Caceres, EJ
   Parodi, ER
AF Fernandez, C.
   Caceres, E. J.
   Parodi, E. R.
TI Phytoplankton Development in a Highly Eutrophic man-made Lake From the
   Pampa plain of Argentina-a functional Approach
SO INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF ENVIRONMENTAL RESEARCH
DT Article
DE Functional groups; Phytoplankton dynamics; Paso de las Piedras
   Reservoir; Diversity
ID MARINE-PHYTOPLANKTON; POPULATION-DYNAMICS; SEASONAL-VARIATION;
   CLIMATE-CHANGE; COMMUNITY; ECOSYSTEM; RESERVOIR; DIVERSITY; DIATOMS;
   SINKING
AB The phytoplankton structure and dynamics were analysed in relation to abiotic variables in Paso de las Piedras Reservoir, Argentina. Phytoplankton driving forces were explored using a functional approach. A total of 15 functional groups were identified among which D, P, H1, F, J and C were the most important. A Canonical variate analysis indicated that the categorization of the species in functional groups and its relationship with the temporal species clustering was not a random result. In the redundancy analysis, temporal ordination dynamics of functional groups was well described by the distribution of samples. Remarkable shifts in composition and biomass of phytoplankton occurred in agreement with changes in temperature, N:P ratio and transparency. The group succession could be summarized as: P/J (early summer)-> P/H1 (late summer)-> P (early autumn)-> P/F (late autumn)-> C (early winter)-> D (late winter)-> Y (early spring)-> D (early spring)-> P (late spring). The majority of the associations detected were typical of eutrophic-hypertrophic systems. With the exception of H1, the groups that most contribute to biovolume were those characteristics of mixed aquatic environments, i.e., non-stratifying lakes or deep, well-mixed epilimnia of stratifying lakes. The diversity indices, in terms of functional groups, were low, meaning that a small number of traits were present and/or that there was an inequitable distribution.
TC 8
Z9 11
SN 1735-6865
EI 2008-2304
PD WIN
PY 2014
VL 8
IS 1
BP 1
EP 14
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000328872100001
ER

PT J
AU Taniguchi, DAA
   Franks, PJS
   Poulin, FJ
AF Taniguchi, Darcy A. A.
   Franks, Peter J. S.
   Poulin, Francis J.
TI Planktonic biomass size spectra: an emergent property of size-dependent
   physiological rates, food web dynamics, and nutrient regimes
SO MARINE ECOLOGY PROGRESS SERIES
DT Article
DE Phytoplankton; Microzooplankton; Planktonic size spectra;
   Nutrient-phytoplankton-zooplankton models
ID DISSOLVED ESTERASE-ACTIVITY; MAXIMAL GROWTH-RATES; CELL-SIZE;
   MARINE-PHYTOPLANKTON; HETEROTROPHIC NANOFLAGELLATE;
   FUNCTIONAL-RESPONSES; UNICELLULAR ALGAE; LIGHT-ABSORPTION; METABOLIC
   THEORY; BODY-SIZE
AB The systematic change in a trait with size is a concise means of representing the diversity and organization of planktonic organisms. Using this simplifying principle, we investigated how interactions between trophic levels, resource concentration, and physiological rates structure the planktonic community. Specifically, we used 3 size-structured nutrient-phytoplankton-zooplankton models differing in their trophic interactions, ranging from herbivorous grazing on one size class to omnivorous grazing on multiple size classes. We parameterized our models based on an extensive review of the literature. The maximum phytoplankton growth, maximum microzooplankton grazing, and phytoplankton half-saturation constant were found to vary inversely with size, and the nutrient half-saturation constant scaled positively with size. We examined the emergent community structure in our models under 4 nutrient regimes: 10, 20, 25, and 30 mu M total N. In all models under all nutrient conditions, the normalized biomass of both phytoplankton and microzooplankton decreased with increasing size. As nutrients were in creased, phytoplankton biomass was added to larger size classes with little change in the extant smaller size classes; for microzooplankton, spectra elongated and biomass was added to all size classes. The different grazing behaviors among models led to more subtle changes in the community structure. Overall, we found that phytoplankton are top-down controlled and microzooplankton are largely bottom-up controlled. Sensitivity analyses showed that both phytoplankton and microzooplankton biomass vary strongly with the size-dependence of the maximum grazing rate. Therefore, this parameter must be known with the greatest accuracy, given its large influence on the emergent community spectra.
TC 8
Z9 8
SN 0171-8630
EI 1616-1599
PD NOV 6
PY 2014
VL 514
BP 13
EP 33
DI 10.3354/meps10968
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology;
   Oceanography
UT WOS:000345700700002
ER

PT J
AU Herrel, A
   Vasilopoulou-Kampitsi, M
   Bonneaud, C
AF Herrel, Anthony
   Vasilopoulou-Kampitsi, Menelia
   Bonneaud, Camille
TI Jumping performance in the highly aquatic frog, Xenopus tropicalis:
   sex-specific relationships between morphology and performance
SO PEERJ
DT Article
DE Locomotion; Trade-off; Jumping; Frog; Sexual dimorphism
ID TRADE-OFFS; DIMORPHISM; TEMPERATURE; LOCOMOTION; MECHANICS; EVOLUTION;
   DESIGN; LAEVIS; FORCE; SIZE
AB Frogs are characterized by a morphology that has been suggested to be related to their unique jumping specialization. Yet, the functional demands associated with jumping and swimming may not be that different as suggested by studies with semi-aquatic frogs. Here, we explore whether features previously identified as indicative of good burst swimming performance also predict jumping performance in a highly aquatic frog, Xenopus tropicalis. Moreover, we test whether the morphological determinants of jumping performance are similar in the two sexes and whether jumping performance differs in the two sexes. Finally we test whether jumping capacity is positively associated with burst swimming and terrestrial endurance capacity in both sexes. Our results show sex-specific differences in jumping performance when correcting for differences in body size. Moreover, the features determining jumping performance are different in the two sexes. Finally, the relationships between different performance traits are sex-dependent as well with females, but not males, showing a trade-off between peak jumping force and the time jumped to exhaustion. This suggests that different selective pressures operate on the two sexes, with females being subjected to constraints on locomotion due to their greater body mass and investment in reproductive capacity. In contrast, males appear to invest more in locomotor capacity giving them higher performance for a given body size compared to females.
RI Herrel, Anthony/C-3712-2013
OI Herrel, Anthony/0000-0003-0991-4434; VASILOPOULOU-KAMPITSI,
   MENELIA/0000-0001-5610-7817
TC 7
Z9 8
SN 2167-8359
PD NOV 4
PY 2014
VL 2
AR e661
DI 10.7717/peerj.661
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000347625200011
PM 25392760
ER

PT J
AU Ah-Peng, C
   Flores, O
   Wilding, N
   Bardat, J
   Marline, L
   Hedderson, TAJ
   Strasberg, D
AF Ah-Peng, Claudine
   Flores, Olivier
   Wilding, Nicholas
   Bardat, Jacques
   Marline, Lovanomanjanahary
   Hedderson, Terry A. J.
   Strasberg, Dominique
TI Functional diversity of subalpine bryophyte communities in an oceanic
   island (La Reunion)
SO ARCTIC ANTARCTIC AND ALPINE RESEARCH
DT Article
ID LIFE-HISTORY VARIATION; LIMITING SIMILARITY; WATER RELATIONS; GRADIENTS;
   PLANT; SIZE; ASSEMBLAGES; REDUNDANCY; TOLERANCE; RICHNESS
AB Increasing temperature imperils worldwide tropical subalpine and alpine ecosystems with the threat of mountaintop extinctions and a subsequent loss of biodiversity and ecosystem functions. This paper provides a first assessment of functional diversity along a high climatic gradient for bryophytes, which represent a major plant compartment in these ecosystems. The present study takes place on the highlands of the Piton des Neiges volcano, the highest summit of La Reunion Island (Western Indian Ocean). We find a relatively high species richness of bryophytes in these subalpine habitats, with a peak of diversity at 2750 m for the ground-dwelling community. We report a strong linear relationship between functional diversity and species richness for epiphytes. Within the same plant group, the relationship between functional richness, based on eight traits, and elevation differed between the ground-dwelling and epiphytic communities, suggesting that different processes may structure bryophyte species assemblages along this short subalpine climatic gradient. Higher functional redundancy in ground-dwelling bryophyte assemblages indicates that this community may be more robust than epiphytic bryophytes to disturbances in these subalpine ecosystems.
OI Marline, Lovanomenjanahary/0000-0002-6181-0440; Flores,
   Olivier/0000-0002-1416-0449; Strasberg, Dominique/0000-0003-3012-252X
TC 5
Z9 6
SN 1523-0430
EI 1938-4246
PD NOV
PY 2014
VL 46
IS 4
SI SI
BP 841
EP 851
DI 10.1657/1938-4246-46.4.841
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Physical Geography
UT WOS:000346219500013
ER

PT J
AU Terseleer, N
   Bruggeman, J
   Lancelot, C
   Gypens, N
AF Terseleer, N.
   Bruggeman, J.
   Lancelot, C.
   Gypens, N.
TI Trait-based representation of diatom functional diversity in a plankton
   functional type model of the eutrophied southern North Sea
SO LIMNOLOGY AND OCEANOGRAPHY
DT Article
ID BELGIAN COASTAL WATERS; CELL-SIZE; MARINE DIATOMS; TRADE-OFFS; COMMUNITY
   STRUCTURE; PHAEOCYSTIS BLOOMS; NUTRIENT-UPTAKE; GLOBAL OCEAN;
   PHYTOPLANKTON; ECOSYSTEM
AB We introduce a trait-based description of diatom functional diversity to an existing plankton functional type (PFT) model, implemented for the eutrophied coastal ecosystem in the Southern Bight of the North Sea. The trait-based description represents a continuum of diatom species, each characterized by a distinct cell volume, and includes size dependence of four diatom traits: the maximum growth rate, the half-saturation constants for nutrient uptake, the photosynthetic efficiency, and the relative affinity of copepods for diatoms. Through competition under seasonally varying forcing, the fitness of each diatom varies throughout time, and the outcome of competition results in a changing community structure. The predicted seasonal change in mean cell volume of the community is supported by field observations: smaller diatoms, which are more competitive in terms of resource acquisition, prevail during the first spring bloom, whereas the summer bloom is dominated by larger species which better resist grazing. The size-based model is used to determine the ecological niche of diatoms in the area and identifies a range of viable sizes that matches observations. The general trade-off between small, competitive diatoms and large, grazing-resistant species is a convenient framework to study patterns in diatom functional diversity. PFT models and trait-based approaches constitute promising complementary tools to study community structure in marine ecosystems.
TC 16
Z9 16
SN 0024-3590
EI 1939-5590
PD NOV
PY 2014
VL 59
IS 6
BP 1958
EP 1972
DI 10.4319/lo.2014.59.6.1958
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000345462700012
ER

PT J
AU Verges, A
   Tomas, F
   Cebrian, E
   Ballesteros, E
   Kizilkaya, Z
   Dendrinos, P
   Karamanlidis, AA
   Spiegel, D
   Sala, E
AF Verges, Adriana
   Tomas, Fiona
   Cebrian, Emma
   Ballesteros, Enric
   Kizilkaya, Zafer
   Dendrinos, Panagiotis
   Karamanlidis, Alexandros A.
   Spiegel, David
   Sala, Enric
TI Tropical rabbitfish and the deforestation of a warming temperate sea
SO JOURNAL OF ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE climate change; eastern Mediterranean; functional diversity; marine
   herbivory; phase shift; plant-herbivore interactions; tropicalization
ID FEEDING-PREFERENCE EXPERIMENTS; EASTERN MEDITERRANEAN SEA;
   CLIMATE-CHANGE; TERRESTRIAL ECOSYSTEMS; SEAWEED COMMUNITIES; HERBIVOROUS
   FISHES; RANGE SHIFTS; REEF FISHES; MARINE; DIVERSITY
AB A striking example of climate-mediated range shifts in marine systems is the intrusion of tropical species into temperate areas world-wide, but we know very little about the ecological consequences of these range expansions. In the Mediterranean Sea, the range expansion of tropical rabbitfishes that first entered the basin via the Suez Canal provides a good example of how tropical herbivorous fish can impact the structure of rocky bottoms in temperate seas. Two species of rabbitfishes have now become a dominant component of total fish biomass in the southernmost part of the eastern Mediterranean. Experimental evidence shows these species can profoundly transform benthic communities, turning algal forests into barrens', but the specific mechanisms that facilitate this shift have not been established. We surveyed 1000km of coastline in the eastern Mediterranean and identified two clearly distinct areas, a warmer group of regions with abundant tropical rabbitfish and a colder group of regions where these consumers were absent/ extremely rare. In regions with abundant rabbitfish, canopy algae were 65% less abundant, and there was a 60% reduction of overall benthic biomass (algae and invertebrates) and a 40% decrease in total species richness. Video-recorded feeding experiments showed that the extensive barrens characteristic of regions with abundant rabbitfish were not due to greater rates of herbivory by these tropical consumers, but rather by functional differences among the herbivores. Temperate herbivorous fish displayed the greatest macroalgae consumption rates overall, but they fed exclusively on established adult macroalgae. In contrast, in regions with abundant rabbitfishes, these consumers fed complementarily on both established macroalgae and on the epilithic algal matrix, which typically contains macroalgal recruits.Synthesis. Range-shifting tropical rabbitfish can severely reduce the biomass and biodiversity of temperate reefs at a scale of hundreds of kilometres. A shift from macroalgal dominance to barrens is mediated by the addition of functionally diverse herbivores that characterize tropical reefs. This work highlights the importance of assessing the functional traits of range-shifting species to determine potential mechanisms of impact on ecological communities.
RI Karamanlidis, Alexandros/S-8239-2017; Verges, Adriana/B-8288-2013
OI Karamanlidis, Alexandros/0000-0003-0943-1619; Verges,
   Adriana/0000-0002-3507-1234; Cebrian, Emma/0000-0001-7588-0135
TC 50
Z9 50
SN 0022-0477
EI 1365-2745
PD NOV
PY 2014
VL 102
IS 6
BP 1518
EP 1527
DI 10.1111/1365-2745.12324
SC Plant Sciences; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000344333800017
ER

PT J
AU Elleouet, J
   Albouy, C
   Lasram, FB
   Mouillot, D
   Leprieur, F
AF Elleouet, J.
   Albouy, C.
   Lasram, F. Ben Rais
   Mouillot, D.
   Leprieur, F.
TI A trait-based approach for assessing and mapping niche overlap between
   native and exotic species: the Mediterranean coastal fish fauna as a
   case study
SO DIVERSITY AND DISTRIBUTIONS
DT Article
DE Biological invasions; coastal fishes; endemic species; exotic species;
   functional traits; Mediterranean Sea; niche overlap
ID CLIMATE-CHANGE; FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; MARINE ECOSYSTEMS; NONNATIVE
   FISHES; GLOBAL CHANGE; RED-SEA; BIODIVERSITY; COMMUNITY; ASSEMBLAGES;
   INVASIONS
AB AimWe propose a trait-based approach for assessing and mapping potential niche overlap between native and exotic species at large spatial scales.
   LocationThe Mediterranean Sea.
   MethodsWe developed two complementary indices based on ecological, biological and ecomorphological similarities between native and exotic species. The first index (FNNr) allows identifying areas where native species are the most at risk in terms of potential ecological interactions with exotic species. The second index (FGO) is species-specific and allows identifying native species that display the broadest functional niche overlap and range overlap with exotic species. We illustrated our approach using the Mediterranean coastal fish fauna as a case study.
   ResultsWe found that endemic and exotic fishes had a similar global functional niche at the Mediterranean scale, that is, they filled the same functional space defined by trait axes. FNNr hotspots were found to be moderately congruent with exotic species richness hotspots. Higher values of FNNr were observed along the coasts of the Levantine Sea. The computation of the FGO index showed that the geographical range of a given endemic species overlapped in average with 52 exotic species. Species showing the highest FGO values displayed localized and/or fragmented distributions in the eastern Mediterranean basin.
   Main conclusionsOur findings suggest that the number of exotic species alone cannot be used as a broad-scale indicator of potential impact because this metric does not account for functional relatedness between native and exotic species. The trait-based indices developed in this study can be used for other taxa in both aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems and should help environmental managers to set up local-scale studies on areas where the potential impact of exotic species on native biodiversity is the highest.
RI albouy, camille/H-9317-2012
OI albouy, camille/0000-0003-1629-2389; Ben Rais Lasram,
   Frida/0000-0003-3327-908X
TC 9
Z9 9
SN 1366-9516
EI 1472-4642
PD NOV
PY 2014
VL 20
IS 11
BP 1333
EP 1344
DI 10.1111/ddi.12235
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000343865200010
ER

PT J
AU Di Sabatino, A
   Cristiano, G
   Pinna, M
   Lombardo, P
   Miccoli, FP
   Marini, G
   Vignini, P
   Cicolani, B
AF Di Sabatino, Antonio
   Cristiano, Giovanni
   Pinna, Maurizio
   Lombardo, Paola
   Miccoli, Francesco Paolo
   Marini, Gabriele
   Vignini, Patrizia
   Cicolani, Bruno
TI Structure, functional organization and biological traits of
   macroinvertebrate assemblages from leaf-bags and benthic samples in a
   third-order stream of Central Apennines (Italy)
SO ECOLOGICAL INDICATORS
DT Article
DE Leaf-bags colonization; Benthic assemblages; Surber net; Community
   structure; Biological traits
ID MEDITERRANEAN-CLIMATE STREAMS; PARTICULATE ORGANIC-MATTER; RIVER
   ECOSYSTEM HEALTH; LITTER BREAKDOWN; ECOLOGICAL INTEGRITY; COMMUNITY
   STRUCTURE; SPECIES RICHNESS; MOUNTAIN STREAM; LAND-USE; DECOMPOSITION
AB Information on both structure and functions is essential to evaluate the ecological integrity of stream ecosystems and their response to natural and anthropogenic disturbance. Leaf-bags have been widely employed to assess stream ecosystem processes and the degree of leaf mass consumption has been proposed as one of the most useful functional descriptor in aquatic environments. However, the breakdown rate of leaves has been compared with structural indicators of macroinvertebrate assemblages derived from leaf-bags or from benthic samples, without any direct comparison on the characteristics of communities sampled with the two methods. The main objective of the paper is to conduct a comparative analysis of the structure, functional organization and biological traits of macroinvertebrate assemblages from artificial leaf packs and from benthic samples of a third-order stream in the Central Apennines (Italy).
   Of the 43 macroinvertebrate taxa globally found in our survey, 9 showed low ability or scarce attitude to colonize leaf-bags, while 6 rare taxa were exclusively sampled in artificial leaf packs. Both assemblages were characterized by the dominance of Chironomidae, though they were more abundant in leaf-bags (71% of total individuals collected) than in benthic samples (44%). Conversely, the mayfly Baetis sp. comprised more than 17% of total individuals collected with Surber nets and only 5% of leaf-bag assemblages. We found that compared to benthic assemblages, leaf-bag communities were less diversified with a lower richness and a lower number of Ephemeroptera, Trichoptera and Plecoptera (EPT) taxa; significant differences also emerged in assemblage composition.
   Contrary to what expected, artificial leaf packs resulted not particularly attractive for shredder organisms and were mainly colonized by collectors. Also the biological trait profiles of the leaf-bag community were significantly different from those shared by resident benthic taxa.
   Our findings could have profound implications in the assessment of the structural and functional integrity of stream ecosystems and in studies on freshwater biodiversity and ecosystem functioning. In these studies, the two methods (leaf-bags and Surber nets) should be regarded as complementary and not alternative. (C) 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
RI Cristiano, Giovanni/P-5045-2017
OI Cristiano, Giovanni/0000-0001-7333-8158; Pinna,
   Maurizio/0000-0001-8335-4098; Lombardo, Paola/0000-0003-0058-7692
TC 9
Z9 9
SN 1470-160X
EI 1872-7034
PD NOV
PY 2014
VL 46
BP 84
EP 91
DI 10.1016/j.ecolind.2014.06.005
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000342656100009
ER

PT J
AU Chui, DH
   Marcellino, M
   Marotta, F
   Sweed, H
   Solimene, U
   Vignali, AI
   Xiao, W
   Ayala, A
   Cagnuolo, U
   Zerbinati, N
AF Chui, D. H.
   Marcellino, M.
   Marotta, F.
   Sweed, H.
   Solimene, U.
   Vignali, A., I
   Xiao, W.
   Ayala, A.
   Cagnuolo, U.
   Zerbinati, N.
TI A Double-Blind, RCT Testing Beneficial Modulation of BDNF in
   Middle-Aged, Life Style-Stressed Subjects: A Clue to Brain Protection?
SO JOURNAL OF CLINICAL AND DIAGNOSTIC RESEARCH
DT Article
DE LD-1227; Neurogenesis; Neuroprotection; Stress-induced neurodegeneration
AB Introduction: The aim of this prospective study was to see whether LD-1227, a quality-controlled marine nutraceuticals shown to protect experimental stress-induced hyppocampal degeneration, could beneficially modulate BDNF, as measured in the serum, in otherwise healthy but work-stressed individuals.
   Materials and Methods: Forty-eight men and women between the ages of 38 and 62 reporting high-demanding work activity but with an overall positive attitude towards their personal life were recruited. Subjects were divided in two group (24 patients each) and blindly supplemented for 2 month with: a) LD-1227 400mg or b) placebo. A third group of healthy non-stressed subjects was used as well. Blood samples were taken before and after the supplementation period. Unstimulated saliva was collected and tested for amylase while serum levels were used to measure BDNF. State Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI), Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI) and psychological wellbeing assessment (PSWB) were measured too. Patients with Val66Met functional polymorphism of BDNF excluded those given their reported association with an impaired release of BDNF.
   Results: Results showed that, as compared to healthy, non-stressed individuals, stressed ones has a trend decrease of BDNF and this was significantly increased by LD 12-1227 supplementation and the same inverse phenomenon occurred to salivary amylase (p<0.05). No change was noted in the PSQI score but, either STAI or PSWB tests scored better in LD-1227 supplemented subjects.
   Conclusion: The present data suggest that LD-1227 is beneficially affecting neuromodulation and related symptoms during common stressful life conditions and may have the potential as tools in a neuroprotective clinical strategy.
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 2249-782X
EI 0973-709X
PD NOV
PY 2014
VL 8
IS 11
DI 10.7860/JCDR/2014/10301.5141
SC General & Internal Medicine
UT WOS:000422551200054
PM 25584253
ER

PT J
AU Padial, AA
   Ceschin, F
   Declerck, SAJ
   De Meester, L
   Bonecker, CC
   Lansac-Toha, FA
   Rodrigues, L
   Rodrigues, LC
   Train, S
   Velho, LFM
   Bini, LM
AF Padial, Andre A.
   Ceschin, Fernanda
   Declerck, Steven A. J.
   De Meester, Luc
   Bonecker, Claudia C.
   Lansac-Toha, Fabio A.
   Rodrigues, Liliana
   Rodrigues, Luzia C.
   Train, Sueli
   Velho, Luiz F. M.
   Bini, Luis M.
TI Dispersal Ability Determines the Role of Environmental, Spatial and
   Temporal Drivers of Metacommunity Structure
SO PLOS ONE
DT Article
ID STREAM INVERTEBRATES; RELATIVE IMPORTANCE; BETA-DIVERSITY; COMMUNITIES;
   ASSEMBLAGES; AUTOCORRELATION; LIMITATION; FLOODPLAIN; ORGANISMS; TRAITS
AB Recently, community ecologists are focusing on the relative importance of local environmental factors and proxies to dispersal limitation to explain spatial variation in community structure. Albeit less explored, temporal processes may also be important in explaining species composition variation in metacommunities occupying dynamic systems. We aimed to evaluate the relative role of environmental, spatial and temporal variables on the metacommunity structure of different organism groups in the Upper Parana River floodplain (Brazil). We used data on macrophytes, fish, benthic macroinvertebrates, zooplankton, periphyton, and phytoplankton collected in up to 36 habitats during a total of eight sampling campaigns over two years. According to variation partitioning results, the importance of predictors varied among biological groups. Spatial predictors were particularly important for organisms with comparatively lower dispersal ability, such as aquatic macrophytes and fish. On the other hand, environmental predictors were particularly important for organisms with high dispersal ability, such as microalgae, indicating the importance of species sorting processes in shaping the community structure of these organisms. The importance of watercourse distances increased when spatial variables were the main predictors of metacommunity structure. The contribution of temporal predictors was low. Our results emphasize the strength of a trait-based analysis and of better defining spatial variables. More importantly, they supported the view that "all-or- nothing" interpretations on the mechanisms structuring metacommunities are rather the exception than the rule.
RI Bonecker, Claudia/D-5946-2013; De Meester, Luc/F-3832-2015; Declerck,
   Steven/E-4338-2010; Rodrigues, Luzia/B-7856-2017; Library,
   Library/A-4320-2012; Padial, Andre/H-8977-2012; Bini, Luis/D-5865-2013;
   Velho, Luiz Felipe/I-9130-2016; Lansac-Toha, Fabio/I-3556-2016
OI De Meester, Luc/0000-0001-5433-6843; Declerck,
   Steven/0000-0001-6179-667X; Rodrigues, Luzia/0000-0002-0593-0931;
   Library, Library/0000-0002-3835-159X; Padial, Andre/0000-0002-8766-5974;
   Bini, Luis/0000-0003-3398-9399; Velho, Luiz Felipe/0000-0001-8111-4955; 
TC 67
Z9 69
SN 1932-6203
PD OCT 23
PY 2014
VL 9
IS 10
AR e111227
DI 10.1371/journal.pone.0111227
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000343662800094
PM 25340577
ER

PT J
AU Rodil, IF
   Compton, TJ
   Lastra, M
AF Rodil, I. F.
   Compton, T. J.
   Lastra, M.
TI Geographic variation in sandy beach macrofauna community and functional
   traits
SO ESTUARINE COASTAL AND SHELF SCIENCE
DT Article
DE boosted regression trees; exposed sandy beaches; feeding guilds;
   functional traits; geographic variation; taxonomic groups; Spain
ID SEDIMENTARY ORGANIC-MATTER; NORTHERN SPAIN; CHILEAN COAST; GRADIENT;
   MACROINFAUNA; ASSEMBLAGES; REGRESSION; PATTERNS; EXPOSURE; IMPACTS
AB Sandy beaches are a common ocean-dominated ecosystem along the north coast of Spain. We conducted field surveys at 39 beaches distributed between 1 degrees and 9 degrees W, ca. 2000 km along this geographic region to document broad patterns of macrobenthic communities, and to describe their association with variables characterising both the beach environment and the characteristics of the adjacent ocean waters. Macrofaunal functional traits are considered to be an informative measure that can be useful for many ecosystem-level questions, as they are based on what organisms do (i.e., their ecological function) rather than on their identification alone. Boosted regression-trees analysis showed that the occurrence of the main taxonomic groups and feeding guilds were differentially associated with the prevailing beach features along this coastline. The occurrence (presence/absence) of molluscs was best explained by the concentration of chlorophyll-a and wave exposure whereas those of crustaceans and polychaetes were best explained by an ensemble of variables including beach slope, sea surface temperature and grain size. A comparison of the feeding guilds demonstrated that the occurrence of suspension feeders was best explained by chlorophyll-a and wave exposure, whereas the occurrence of deposit feeders was best explained by beach slope, sea surface temperature and chlorophyll-a. The occurrence of predators and scavengers was best explained by sea surface temperature and beach slope. Based on the patterns presented here, we confirm that the upwelling events that occur regularly on this coastline are a structuring agent for beach communities. Future work needs to examine the role of the oceanographic conditions of the region for they might represent the driving forces behind large-scale shifts in macrofauna communities. (C) 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
RI Rodil, Ivan/I-5305-2013; Scientific Productivity, CIIMAR/N-6498-2017;
   Scientific output, CIIMAR/E-5122-2012
OI Rodil, Ivan/0000-0001-6375-1598; Scientific Productivity,
   CIIMAR/0000-0002-3703-4402; Scientific output,
   CIIMAR/0000-0001-6270-2153
TC 11
Z9 11
SN 0272-7714
EI 1096-0015
PD OCT 5
PY 2014
VL 150
SI SI
BP 102
EP 110
DI 10.1016/j.ecss.2013.06.019
PN A
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000346221000011
ER

PT J
AU Sandulli, R
   Semprucci, F
   Balsamo, M
AF Sandulli, R.
   Semprucci, F.
   Balsamo, M.
TI Taxonomic and functional biodiversity variations of meiobenthic and
   nematode assemblages across an extreme environment: a study case in a
   Blue Hole cave
SO ITALIAN JOURNAL OF ZOOLOGY
DT Article
DE Blue Hole; Maldives; Meiobenthos; extreme habitats; free-living
   nematodes
ID MALDIVES INDIAN-OCEAN; MARINE NEMATODES; DEEP-SEA;
   VERTICAL-DISTRIBUTION; CONTINENTAL-SHELF; MICROHABITAT TYPE; MATURITY
   INDEX; ARABIAN SEA; NE ATLANTIC; NORTH-SEA
AB In this paper we have explored for the first time the biodiversity pattern of the meiobenthic assemblage in a Blue Hole of the Maldivian Archipelago. The cave is characterised by a marked change of the chemical water parameters below 50m of depth, with a relevant increase in hydrogen sulfide, carbon dioxide, and sulfates (H2S, CO(2)and SO42-). Thus, three stations were selected above and two below the chemo-thermocline in order to test the possible effects of the chemical variations on the meiobenthos. The difficulty of adaptation to these environmental conditions is clearly suggested by the presence of only a few dominant meiobenthic taxa in the bottom of the cave. However, meiobenthic organisms seemed more resistant than macrobenthos, which disappeared completely below this depth. The nematode assemblage was mainly represented by Xyalidae, Desmodoridae, Comesomatidae and Linhomoeidae. A high level of confinement of nematode genera at the different depths has been documented. In the upper part, their structure and biodiversity were comparable to those of the Maldivian subtidal habitats characterised by fine coralline sediments, while a notable dominance was detected in the bottom. The Blue Hole features also influenced the functional traits of the nematode assemblage with a documented increasing number of general opportunists and decrease of Maturity Index. The dominance of non-selective deposit feeders supports the hypothesis of a high amount of organic matter accumulated on the sea bottom of the cave.
RI Semprucci, Federica/N-5889-2014; sandulli, roberto/B-8401-2008
OI Semprucci, Federica/0000-0003-1360-7242; Sandulli,
   Roberto/0000-0003-3340-3298
TC 10
Z9 12
SN 1125-0003
EI 1748-5851
PD OCT 2
PY 2014
VL 81
IS 4
BP 508
EP 516
DI 10.1080/11250003.2014.952356
SC Zoology
UT WOS:000344781500005
ER

PT J
AU Gerke, JM
   Farnsworth, EJ
   Brumback, WE
AF Gerke, Jessica M.
   Farnsworth, Elizabeth J.
   Brumback, William E.
TI FIFTEEN YEARS OF CHANGE: WHAT A COMPARISON OF THE TWO FLORA CONSERVANDA
   LISTS CAN TELL US ABOUT RARE PLANT SPECIES IN THE NEW ENGLAND LANDSCAPE
SO RHODORA
DT Article
DE Rare plants; conservation; New England; functional groups; pollination;
   biogeography; habitat; range shifts
ID MASSACHUSETTS; BIOGEOGRAPHY; DECLINES; BRITAIN; TRAITS
AB Flora Conservanda is a list of native plant taxa considered to be most rare in New England. Originally published in 1996, the list was updated in 2012. The updated list includes 593 taxa in five divisions: 62 in Division 1 (Globally Rare), 325 in Divisions 2 and 2(a) (Regionally Rare), 57 in Division 3 (Locally Rare), 96 in Division 4 (Regionally Historic), and 53 in Division IND. (Presumed Rare, but confirmation required). Since the first publication of the list, substantial changes have occurred both in the landscape and in our understanding of the taxa. Here, we compare the 2012 update to the original list, noting changes in the species assigned to each division and recording the reported number of extant populations (Element Occurences) in each state. We assessed trends in rarity during the intervening 15 years among 676 taxa in one or both lists, and identified further data collection that would be beneficial. One hundred and thirty-seven taxa were new to the list in 2012. The numbers of reported extant occurrences increased for 118 taxa and declined for 40 taxa since the 1996 publication; 10 taxa declined in one or more states and increased in others. Little net change in occurrence numbers was seen for 213 taxa, and trend data were insufficient to assess population trends for 295 taxa. Massachusetts (55 or 18.4% of MA listed taxa), Connecticut (55 or 18.4%), and Maine (46 or 16.9%) had the most taxa with increased numbers of occurrences, and Massachusetts (22 or 7.7%), Maine (20 or 8.3%), and New Hampshire (17 or 8.4%) had the most taxa with decreased occurrence numbers. Increased occurrence numbers were more common among those taxa characteristic of shores and banks, wetlands, and forests, whereas higher proportions of declining species were characteristic of coastal, alpine, and exposed rocky areas. A significantly higher proportion of entomophilous species showed occurrence declines than increases. Overall, the magnitude and distribution of noted changes may be due to the success of concerted efforts to seek out previously overlooked populations, range expansions of certain taxa, or validation of older records. Trends apparent in the Flora Conservanda data can be used to prioritize regional conservation actions and data collection.
TC 0
Z9 1
SN 0035-4902
EI 1938-3401
PD OCT
PY 2014
VL 116
IS 968
BP 428
EP 493
DI 10.3119/13-21
SC Plant Sciences
UT WOS:000348278900002
ER

PT J
AU Wieters, EA
   Medrano, A
   Perez-Matus, A
AF Wieters, Evie A.
   Medrano, Alba
   Perez-Matus, Alejandro
TI Functional community structure of shallow hard bottom communities at
   Easter Island (Rapa Nui)
SO LATIN AMERICAN JOURNAL OF AQUATIC RESEARCH
DT Article
DE functional groups; community structure; coral; fish assemblages; Easter
   Island; Chile
ID CORAL-REEF; PHASE-SHIFTS; CLIMATE-CHANGE; FISH COMMUNITIES; DIVERSITY;
   RESILIENCE; ECOSYSTEMS; ENVIRONMENT; COMPETITION; HERBIVORY
AB Important, often abrupt, and irreversible shifts associated with the degradation of ecosystem functioning and services are increasingly commonplace. Thus, a trait-based view of communities may be more insightful than that based solely on species composition, especially when inferring ecological responses to environmental change. This underscores the importance and urgency of establishing benchmarks against which future community changes and functional structure can be evaluated. As a first step toward setting these baselines and their current spatial variability, we here describe geographic and among-habitat patterns in the functional structure of shallow hard bottom communities, including fish assemblages, across the northeast and west coasts of Rapa Nui. We also document temporal patterns of change in dominant benthic functional groups that have taken place over the past 15 years at selected sites on this isolated Pacific island. Generally weak vertical zonation patterns were observed, with most striking differences due to the paucity of branching pocilloporid corals in shallow waters(<7 m), where massive corals of Porites predominate. We identified three main 'groups' of sites in terms of the relative abundance of major functional groups and these did not follow geographic arrangement or strict coastline orientation. The similar spatial change in benthic and fish functional community structure documented here suggests there may be strong coupling with coastal oceanographic conditions that varies on scales of 1s-10s of km. Temporal patterns document relatively rapid recovery of total coral cover, largely via compensatory change in relative coral composition with an increase in Porites upon abrupt decline of Pocillopora, following extensive coral mortality caused by thermal stress (coral bleaching) in 2000. Moreover, coral abundance in shallow habitats increased beyond pre-disturbance levels (i.e., 1999-2000). In contrast to shallow habitats, corals again suffered extensive mortality and reduced cover by 2005 at mid-(10-15 m) and deep (>15 m) habitats, with contrasting recovery. These results suggest depth-dependent disturbance regimes that differ in types and frequency of events, as well as capacity to recover. Overall, our results highlight the apparent resilience of the current system and provide a first-cut benchmark as to where management subsystems might be prescribed so as to spatially match ecosystem characteristics.
RI Perez-Matus, Alejandro/F-5019-2014
OI Perez-Matus, Alejandro/0000-0001-9591-6721
TC 9
Z9 9
SN 0718-560X
EI 0717-7178
PD OCT
PY 2014
VL 42
IS 4
SI SI
BP 827
EP 844
DI 10.3856/vol42-issue4-fulltext-10
SC Fisheries; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000347406100010
ER

PT J
AU Trimble, MJ
   van Aarde, RJ
AF Trimble, M. J.
   van Aarde, R. J.
TI Amphibian and reptile communities and functional groups over a land-use
   gradient in a coastal tropical forest landscape of high richness and
   endemicity
SO ANIMAL CONSERVATION
DT Article
DE acacia woodland; anura; cultivation; frog; functional diversity;
   human-modified landscape; plantation; Maputaland
ID NORTHEASTERN COSTA-RICA; SOUTH-AFRICA; SPECIES RICHNESS; HABITAT CHANGE;
   DUNE FORESTS; DIVERSITY; BIODIVERSITY; CONSERVATION; FROGS;
   FRAGMENTATION
AB Information on the response of herpetofauna to different land uses is limited although important for land-use planning to support conservation in human-modified landscapes. Although transformation is dogmatically associated with extinction, species respond idiosyncratically to land-use change, and persistence of species in habitat fragments may depend on careful management of the human-modified matrix. We sampled herpetofauna over a vegetation-type gradient representative of regional land uses [old-growth forest, degraded forest, acacia woodland (i.e. new-growth forest), eucalyptus plantation and sugar cane cultivation] in the forest belt skirting the southeastern coast of Africa, part of a biodiversity hotspot hosting many endemic herpetofaunal species in a highly transformed landscape. We categorized species into trait-derived functional groups, and assessed abundance and richness of groups and compared community metrics along the gradient. We further assessed the capacity of environmental variables to predict richness and abundance. Overall, old-growth forest harbored the highest richness and abundance, and amphibians and reptiles responded similarly to the gradient. Richness was low in cultivation, and surprisingly, in degraded forest, but substantial in acacia woodland and plantation. Composition differed between natural vegetation types (forest, degraded forest) and anthropogenic types (plantation, cultivation), while acacia woodland grouped with the latter for amphibians and the former for reptiles. Functional group richness eroded along the gradient, a pattern driven by the sensitivity of fossorial/ground-dependent amphibians (A2) and reptiles (R2) and vegetationd-welling amphibians (A4) to habitat change. Variables describing temperature, cover and soil were good predictors of amphibian abundance, particularly of functional groups, but not for reptiles. Conserving forest and preventing degradation is important for forest herpetofaunal conservation, restoration and plantations have intermediate value, and cultivation is least beneficial. Our study demonstrates the utility of function-related assessments, beyond traditional metrics alone, for understanding community responses to transformation. Particularly, fossorial/ground-dependent amphibians and reptiles, and vegetation-dwelling amphibians should be closely monitored.
RI Trimble, Morgan/B-1161-2010
OI Trimble, Morgan/0000-0002-9914-0788
TC 15
Z9 15
SN 1367-9430
EI 1469-1795
PD OCT
PY 2014
VL 17
IS 5
BP 441
EP 453
DI 10.1111/acv.12111
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000345213600006
ER

PT J
AU Scott, F
   Blanchard, JL
   Andersen, KH
AF Scott, Finlay
   Blanchard, Julia L.
   Andersen, Ken H.
TI mizer: an R package for multispecies, trait-based and community size
   spectrum ecological modelling
SO METHODS IN ECOLOGY AND EVOLUTION
DT Article
DE size spectrum; multispecies modelling; trophic level; natural resource
   management; fisheries
ID MARINE ECOSYSTEMS; TRADE-OFFS; FISHERIES; PREDATION; ABUNDANCE; FORAGE
AB <list list-type="1" id="mee312256-list-0001"> Size spectrum ecological models are representations of a community of individuals which grow and change trophic level. A key emergent feature of these models is the size spectrum; the total abundance of all individuals that scales negatively with size. The models we focus on are designed to capture fish community dynamics useful for assessing the community impacts of fishing. We present mizer, an R package for implementing dynamic size spectrum ecological models of an entire aquatic community subject to fishing. Multiple fishing gears can be defined and fishing mortality can change through time making it possible to simulate a range of exploitation strategies and management options.mizer implements three versions of the size spectrum modelling framework: the community model, where individuals are only characterized by their size; the trait-based model, where individuals are further characterized by their asymptotic size; and the multispecies model where additional trait differences are resolved. A range of plot, community indicator and summary methods are available to inspect the results of the simulations. <doi origin="wiley" registered="yes">10.1111/(ISSN)2041-210X</doi
RI Blanchard, Julia/E-4919-2010
OI Blanchard, Julia/0000-0003-0532-4824; Andersen, Ken
   Haste/0000-0002-8478-3430
TC 19
Z9 20
SN 2041-210X
EI 2041-2096
PD OCT
PY 2014
VL 5
IS 10
BP 1121
EP 1125
DI 10.1111/2041-210X.12256
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000344598300016
PM 25866613
ER

PT J
AU Edmunds, PJ
   Adjeroud, M
   Baskett, ML
   Baums, IB
   Budd, AF
   Carpenter, RC
   Fabina, NS
   Fan, TY
   Franklin, EC
   Gross, K
   Han, XY
   Jacobson, L
   Klaus, JS
   McClanahan, TR
   O'Leary, JK
   van Oppen, MJH
   Pochon, X
   Putnam, HM
   Smith, TB
   Stat, M
   Sweatman, H
   van Woesik, R
   Gates, RD
AF Edmunds, Peter J.
   Adjeroud, Mehdi
   Baskett, Marissa L.
   Baums, Iliana B.
   Budd, Ann F.
   Carpenter, Robert C.
   Fabina, Nicholas S.
   Fan, Tung-Yung
   Franklin, Erik C.
   Gross, Kevin
   Han, Xueying
   Jacobson, Lianne
   Klaus, James S.
   McClanahan, Tim R.
   O'Leary, Jennifer K.
   van Oppen, Madeleine J. H.
   Pochon, Xavier
   Putnam, Hollie M.
   Smith, Tyler B.
   Stat, Michael
   Sweatman, Hugh
   van Woesik, Robert
   Gates, Ruth D.
TI Persistence and Change in Community Composition of Reef Corals through
   Present, Past, and Future Climates
SO PLOS ONE
DT Article
ID OCEAN ACIDIFICATION; PHASE-SHIFTS; CARIBBEAN CORALS; LIFE-HISTORIES;
   RESILIENCE; DYNAMICS; ECOLOGY; DECLINE; WINNERS; LOSERS
AB The reduction in coral cover on many contemporary tropical reefs suggests a different set of coral community assemblages will dominate future reefs. To evaluate the capacity of reef corals to persist over various time scales, we examined coral community dynamics in contemporary, fossil, and simulated future coral reef ecosystems. Based on studies between 1987 and 2012 at two locations in the Caribbean, and between 1981 and 2013 at five locations in the Indo-Pacific, we show that many coral genera declined in abundance, some showed no change in abundance, and a few coral genera increased in abundance. Whether the abundance of a genus declined, increased, or was conserved, was independent of coral family. An analysis of fossil-reef communities in the Caribbean revealed changes in numerical dominance and relative abundances of coral genera, and demonstrated that neither dominance nor taxon was associated with persistence. As coral family was a poor predictor of performance on contemporary reefs, a trait-based, dynamic, multi-patch model was developed to explore the phenotypic basis of ecological performance in a warmer future. Sensitivity analyses revealed that upon exposure to thermal stress, thermal tolerance, growth rate, and longevity were the most important predictors of coral persistence. Together, our results underscore the high variation in the rates and direction of change in coral abundances on contemporary and fossil reefs. Given this variation, it remains possible that coral reefs will be populated by a subset of the present coral fauna in a future that is warmer than the recent past.
RI Baskett, Marissa/P-1762-2014; van Oppen, Madeleine/C-3261-2008;
   Adjeroud, Mehdi/J-6411-2016; Baums, Iliana/G-6435-2010; Stat,
   Michael/K-5290-2012
OI Baskett, Marissa/0000-0001-6102-1110; Adjeroud,
   Mehdi/0000-0002-6825-8759; Baums, Iliana/0000-0001-6463-7308; Putnam,
   Hollie/0000-0003-2322-3269; Han, Xueying/0000-0003-4643-2880; Stat,
   Michael/0000-0002-1663-3422; McClanahan, Timothy/0000-0001-5821-3584;
   van Oppen, Madeleine/0000-0003-4607-0744
TC 21
Z9 22
SN 1932-6203
PD OCT 1
PY 2014
VL 9
IS 10
AR e107525
DI 10.1371/journal.pone.0107525
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000343729600011
PM 25272143
ER

PT J
AU Lambert, GI
   Jennings, S
   Kaiser, MJ
   Davies, TW
   Hiddink, JG
AF Lambert, Gwladys I.
   Jennings, Simon
   Kaiser, Michel J.
   Davies, Thomas W.
   Hiddink, Jan G.
TI Quantifying recovery rates and resilience of seabed habitats impacted by
   bottom fishing
SO JOURNAL OF APPLIED ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE Ecosystem-based fisheries management; fishing impact; otter trawling;
   recovery; scallop dredging; vessel monitoring system; VMS
ID BENTHIC INVERTEBRATE COMMUNITIES; ECOSYSTEM-BASED MANAGEMENT; TRAWLING
   DISTURBANCE; PHYSICAL DISTURBANCE; SPECIES RICHNESS; MARINE BENTHOS;
   GEORGES BANK; SYSTEM; DIVERSITY; BIOMASS
AB 1. The Ecosystem Approach to Fisheries requires that managers take account of the environmental impacts of fishing. Towed bottom-fishing gears disturb seabed habitats and cause mortality of benthic invertebrates. Measurements of recovery rates of marine habitats after fishing disturbance can provide insight into spatial variations in resilience and may be used to assess the sustainability of these fishing impacts and inform the development of appropriate management strategies.
   2. To measure recovery on real fishing grounds at fishery-and management-relevant scales, we estimated the post-disturbance recovery rates of epifaunal marine benthic communities on coarse and hard substrata across >4000 km(2) of seabed where the patchy distribution of bottom fishing in space and time creates a mosaic of habitat patches at different stages of recovery.
   3. The history of fishing events at each location was described using satellite vessel monitoring system (VMS) data. Recovery rates were extrapolated from the relationship between time since the last fishing event and abundance of epifaunal benthic invertebrates with life-history traits that are expected to make them sensitive to fishing.
   4. Recovery of abundance of all species and functional groups (medium to medium-large size, medium to long life span, suspension feeding, high body flexibility and low mobility species) was estimated to take < 1 to > 10 years, depending on the group, with faster recovery in areas with faster tidal currents.
   5. The recovery of large species was faster when conspecifics were abundant within a radius of 6 km, suggesting an important role for maintaining local sources of recruits to repopulate impacted areas.
   6. Synthesis and applications. We used a new method to estimate the recovery rate of benthic communities and to describe spatial differences in sensitivity to fishing. Bottom fishing in areas that recover quickly will minimize overall impacts, while leaving unfished patches of seabed will enhance recovery rates in fished areas. We conclude that management plans which limit bottom trawls and dredge fisheries to more resilient areas and maintain unfished patches within these areas will minimize the collective impacts of a given amount of fishing effort on seabed habitats.
RI Jennings, Simon/F-5085-2012; Davies, Thomas/H-8103-2013; Hiddink, Jan
   Geert/C-1238-2009
OI Jennings, Simon/0000-0002-2390-7225; Davies, Thomas/0000-0002-4673-9893;
   Hiddink, Jan Geert/0000-0001-7114-830X
TC 37
Z9 37
SN 0021-8901
EI 1365-2664
PD OCT
PY 2014
VL 51
IS 5
BP 1326
EP 1336
DI 10.1111/1365-2664.12277
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000342851300022
ER

PT J
AU Lovelock, CE
   Reef, R
   Pandolfi, JM
AF Lovelock, Catherine E.
   Reef, Ruth
   Pandolfi, John M.
TI Variation in elemental stoichiometry and RNA:DNA in four phyla of
   benthic organisms from coral reefs
SO FUNCTIONAL ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE Chlorophyta; coral; coral reefs; ecological stoichiometry; Great Barrier
   Reef; Lizard Island; macroalgae; Phaeophyta; Rhodophyta
ID N-P RATIOS; BIOLOGICAL STOICHIOMETRY; NUTRIENT AVAILABILITY;
   STYLOPHORA-PISTILLATA; MARINE MACROALGAE; CHEMICAL ECOLOGY; FUNCTIONAL
   FORM; BUILDING CORALS; GENOME SIZE; GROWTH
AB The elemental composition of organisms has been linked to traits such as growth rates, through investment of phosphorus (P) in RNA (called the Growth Rate Hypothesis) and through ecological processes such as susceptibility to predation and herbivory. To test the predictions of the Growth Rate Hypothesis, we assessed the elemental composition and RNA of four phyla of common, co-occurring benthic coral reef organisms, corals, and green, brown and red macroalgae, whose patterns of dominance are predicted to be strongly influenced by differences in growth and herbivory and thus elemental stoichiometry. We assessed the importance of phylogeny and functional form, two important attributes for predicting the composition of macroalgal communities, on the variation in elemental composition. Over these widely divergent taxonomic groups of organisms, we found support for links between elemental composition and RNA in tissues. The RNA:DNA in corals was positively correlated with % nitrogen (N) and negatively correlated with carbon (C):N ratios of tissues while RNA:DNA and RNA concentrations in macroalgae were positively correlated with %N, N:P ratios and negatively correlated with C:N ratios. Corals had higher concentrations of P and lower C:P ratios than macroalgae. Among the macroalgal lineages, C:P was higher in the brown algae than in red and green algae. Overall, the variation in elemental composition of macroalgae was relatively low compared with the variation reported for terrestrial plants and similar to that in corals. Analysis of phylogenetic sources of variation (family and genus) in elemental composition and RNA found that genus accounted for a significant proportion of variation in both corals and macroalgae (15-47%), but the largest source of variation (50-97%) was unexplained by our statistical model and thus likely attributable to species and environmental factors. Although elemental composition of macroalgae did not vary in a way that was consistent with functional form models, genera with larger thalli had higher tissue N than smaller forms and more lineages with greater complexity of form had lower C:P ratios than less complex brown algal lineages. Our data indicate that the despite relatively low levels of variation in elemental composition compared with terrestrial organisms, elemental stoichiometry varied significantly among coral reef taxa and with the structure of organisms and thus may have potential for predicting variation in growth rates and patterns of consumption on coral reefs.
RI Pandolfi, John/A-3121-2009; Lovelock, Catherine/G-7370-2012
OI Pandolfi, John/0000-0003-3047-6694; Lovelock,
   Catherine/0000-0002-2219-6855
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0269-8463
EI 1365-2435
PD OCT
PY 2014
VL 28
IS 5
BP 1299
EP 1309
DI 10.1111/1365-2435.12256
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000342615100026
ER

PT J
AU Guelzow, N
   Dirks, M
   Hillebrand, H
AF Guelzow, Nils
   Dirks, Merten
   Hillebrand, Helmut
TI Effect of (a)synchronous light fluctuation on diversity, functional and
   structural stability of a marine phytoplankton metacommunity
SO OECOLOGIA
DT Article
DE Dispersal; Species richness; Temporal heterogeneity; Metacommunity;
   Evenness
ID COMPENSATORY DYNAMICS; COMPETITIVE COMMUNITIES; ECOSYSTEM STABILITY;
   SPECIES-DIVERSITY; ENVIRONMENTAL FLUCTUATIONS; ECOLOGICAL COMMUNITIES;
   VARIABLE ENVIRONMENTS; NATURAL PHYTOPLANKTON; POPULATION-DYNAMICS;
   SPATIAL SYNCHRONY
AB Disentangling the mechanisms that maintain the stability of communities and ecosystem properties has become a major research focus in ecology in the face of anthropogenic environmental change. Dispersal plays a pivotal role in maintaining diversity in spatially subdivided communities, but only a few experiments have simultaneously investigated how dispersal and environmental fluctuation affect community dynamics and ecosystem stability. We performed an experimental study using marine phytoplankton species as model organisms to test these mechanisms in a metacommunity context. We established three levels of dispersal and exposed the phytoplankton to fluctuating light levels, where fluctuations were either spatially asynchronous or synchronous across patches of the metacommunity. Dispersal had no effect on diversity and ecosystem function (biomass), while light fluctuations affected both evenness and community biomass. The temporal variability of community biomass was reduced by fluctuating light and temporal beta diversity was influenced interactively by dispersal and fluctuation, whereas spatial variability in community biomass and beta diversity were barely affected by treatments. Along the establishing gradient of species richness and dominance, community biomass increased but temporal variability of biomass decreased, thus highest stability was associated with species-rich but highly uneven communities and less influenced by compensatory dynamics. In conclusion, both specific traits (dominance) and diversity (richness) affected the stability of metacommunities under fluctuating conditions.
RI Hillebrand, Helmut/I-1717-2014
OI Hillebrand, Helmut/0000-0001-7449-1613
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 0029-8549
EI 1432-1939
PD OCT
PY 2014
VL 176
IS 2
BP 497
EP 510
DI 10.1007/s00442-014-3015-6
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000342205600018
PM 25119159
ER

PT J
AU Marcantonio, M
   Rocchini, D
   Ottaviani, G
AF Marcantonio, Matteo
   Rocchini, Duccio
   Ottaviani, Gianluigi
TI Impact of alien species on dune systems: a multifaceted approach
SO BIODIVERSITY AND CONSERVATION
DT Article
DE Functional diversity; Phylogenetic diversity; Biodiversity
   conservations; Alien species; Dune systems
ID SEA-LEVEL RISE; FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; COASTAL DUNES; PLANT-COMMUNITIES;
   CLIMATE-CHANGE; PHYLOGENETIC DIVERSITY; ECOLOGICAL COMMUNITIES; LIMITING
   SIMILARITY; TRAIT CONVERGENCE; MODEL SELECTION
AB We applied a multifaceted approach, in terms of taxonomic, phylogenetic and functional diversity, to study at fine scale how three plant communities occurring in a Mediterranean dune have been affected by the encroachment of alien species. We sampled 81 sites in a Site of Community Importance in Central Italy. Past and present land use/cover data have been derived using GIS and remote sensing tools. Information on plants phylogenesis and functional traits has been gathered from several databases. Ecological variables have been collected. GLMs in conjunction with an Information Based approach were used to model species composition, richness and phylogenetic diversity. Multivariate analysis has been used to study functional diversity. The results outlined how total species richness is related to recent land transformations and to a set of environmental factors. The analyses of functional and phylogenetic diversity support the idea that alien species significantly affect the functional and phylogenetic characteristics of the native plant communities. Habitat filtering seems to be predominant in not-invaded plots, whereas limiting similarity/niche differentiation is predominant in driving community assembly of invaded communities. The attained scenario depicts the spread of a reduced group of alien species phylogenetically and functionally well-differentiated, able to reduce the abundance of native species, not to exclude them though. Ultimately, the multifaceted approach assisted in understanding the community assembly of dune vegetation, and to discern the relative impact of alien species on native plant communities. Such approach represents a crucial step to achieve an efficient management of dune habitats, as useful tool to monitor and to effectively protect their biodiversity and functioning.
OI Rocchini, Duccio/0000-0003-0087-0594
TC 8
Z9 8
SN 0960-3115
EI 1572-9710
PD OCT
PY 2014
VL 23
IS 11
BP 2645
EP 2668
DI 10.1007/s10531-014-0742-2
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000341081400001
ER

PT J
AU Smith, SL
   Merico, A
   Hohn, S
   Brandt, G
AF Smith, S. Lan
   Merico, Agostino
   Hohn, Soenke
   Brandt, Gunnar
TI Sizing-up nutrient uptake kinetics: combining a physiological trade-off
   with size-scaling of phytoplankton traits
SO MARINE ECOLOGY PROGRESS SERIES
DT Article
DE Phytoplankton; Nutrient uptake kinetics; Size; Trait; Model; Trade-off
ID COMMUNITY STRUCTURE; FUNCTIONAL TRAITS; NITRATE UPTAKE; MODEL;
   ECOSYSTEM; OCEAN; DYNAMICS; GROWTH; ACCLIMATION; ENVIRONMENTS
AB We present a new model for the kinetics of nutrient uptake by phytoplankton, which we derive by combining existing models: (1) a size-based modeling framework that accounts for the effects of extra-cellular diffusive limitation, and (2) a model of optimal resource allocation that maximizes uptake rate subject to a physiological trade-off. We show that the new model, unlike either of its pre-existing components, is able to reproduce the observed range of variation in the half-saturation constant for nitrate uptake as a function of both ambient nitrate concentration and cell size. Our results illustrate that the combination of mechanistic trait-based modeling and physiological trade-offs can greatly advance our understanding of plankton ecology.
RI Smith, S./D-2493-2012
OI Smith, S./0000-0002-2338-5893; Trainer, Clarivate/0000-0001-9593-4831;
   Merico, Agostino/0000-0001-8095-8056
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 0171-8630
EI 1616-1599
PD SEP 24
PY 2014
VL 511
BP 33
EP 39
DI 10.3354/meps10903
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology;
   Oceanography
UT WOS:000342924200003
ER

PT J
AU Hale, R
   Mavrogordato, MN
   Tolhurst, TJ
   Solan, M
AF Hale, R.
   Mavrogordato, M. N.
   Tolhurst, T. J.
   Solan, M.
TI Characterizations of how species mediate ecosystem properties require
   more comprehensive functional effect descriptors
SO SCIENTIFIC REPORTS
DT Article
ID GASTROPOD HYDROBIA-ULVAE; IN-SITU; SPATIAL-DISTRIBUTION;
   NEREIS-DIVERSICOLOR; SEDIMENT REWORKING; MUD SHRIMP; AXIAL
   TOMODENSITOMETRY; INTERTIDAL SEDIMENTS; MARINE BENTHOS; ALITTA-VIRENS
AB The importance of individual species in mediating ecosystem process and functioning is generally accepted, but categorical descriptors that summarize species-specific contributions to ecosystems tend to reference a limited number of biological traits and underestimate the importance of how organisms interact with their environment. Here, we show how three functionally contrasting sediment-dwelling marine invertebrates affect fluid and particle transport - important processes in mediating nutrient cycling - and use high-resolution reconstructions of burrow geometry to determine the extent and nature of biogenic modification. We find that individual functional effect descriptors fall short of being able to adequately characterize how species mediate the stocks and flows of important ecosystem properties and that, in contrary to common practice and understanding, they are not substitutable with one another because they emphasize different aspects of species activity and behavior. When information derived from these metrics is combined with knowledge of how species behave and modify their environment, however, detailed mechanistic information emerges that increases the likelihood that a species functional standing will be appropriately summarized. Our study provides evidence that more comprehensive functional effect descriptors are required if they are to be of value to those tasked with projecting how altered biodiversity will influence future ecosystems.
RI Tolhurst, Trevor/B-1929-2008
OI Tolhurst, Trevor/0000-0002-8578-7580; Solan, Martin/0000-0001-9924-5574;
   Hale, Rachel/0000-0001-5079-5954
TC 17
Z9 17
SN 2045-2322
PD SEP 24
PY 2014
VL 4
AR 6463
DI 10.1038/srep06463
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000342124700006
PM 25249055
ER

PT J
AU Comte, L
   Murienne, J
   Grenouillet, G
AF Comte, Lise
   Murienne, Jerome
   Grenouillet, Gael
TI Species traits and phylogenetic conservatism of climate-induced range
   shifts in stream fishes
SO NATURE COMMUNICATIONS
DT Article
ID LIFE-HISTORY; MARINE BIVALVES; EXTINCTION RISK; EVOLUTION; SIGNAL;
   BIODIVERSITY; EXPANSION; LATITUDE; BEHAVIOR; HABITAT
AB Understanding climate-induced range shifts is crucial for biodiversity conservation. However, no general consensus has so far emerged about the mechanisms involved and the role of phylogeny in shaping species responses has been poorly explored. Here, we investigate whether species traits and their underlying phylogenetic constraints explain altitudinal shifts at the trailing and leading edges of stream fish species ranges. We demonstrate that these shifts are related to dissimilar mechanisms: whereas range retractions show some support for phylogenetic clustering due to a high level of conservatism in thermal safety margins, range expansions are underpinned by both evolutionarily conserved and labile traits, notably trophic position and life-history strategy, hence decreasing the strength of phylogenetic signal. Therefore, while climate change brings many difficulties in establishing a general understanding of species vulnerability, these findings emphasize how combining trait-based approaches in light of the species evolutionary history may offer new opportunities in facing conservation challenges.
OI Comte, Lise/0000-0001-8030-0019; Murienne, Jerome/0000-0003-1474-7829
TC 21
Z9 21
SN 2041-1723
PD SEP
PY 2014
VL 5
AR 5023
DI 10.1038/ncomms6053
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000343029100002
PM 25248802
ER

PT J
AU Miller, JH
   Behrensmeyer, AK
   Du, A
   Lyons, SK
   Patterson, D
   Toth, A
   Villasenor, A
   Kanga, E
   Reed, D
AF Miller, Joshua H.
   Behrensmeyer, Anna K.
   Du, Andrew
   Lyons, S. Kathleen
   Patterson, David
   Toth, Aniko
   Villasenor, Amelia
   Kanga, Erustus
   Reed, Denne
TI Ecological fidelity of functional traits based on species
   presence-absence in a modern mammalian bone assemblage (Amboseli, Kenya)
SO PALEOBIOLOGY
DT Article
ID MOLLUSCAN DEATH ASSEMBLAGES; TAPHONOMIC BIAS; MORPHOLOGICAL
   DIVERSIFICATION; FAUNAL IMPOVERISHMENT; TAXONOMIC DIVERSITY; SKELETAL
   REMAINS; AFRICAN SAVANNA; MARINE BIOTAS; TIME; ECOSYSTEM
AB Comparisons between modern death assemblages and their source communities have demonstrated fidelity to species diversity across a variety of environments and taxonomic groups. However, differential species preservation and collection (including body-size bias) in both modern and fossil death assemblages may still skew the representation of other important ecological characteristics. Here, we move beyond live-dead taxonomic fidelity and focus on the recovery of functional ecology (how species interact with their ecosystem) at the community level for a diverse non-volant mammal community (87 species; Amboseli, Kenya). We use published literature to characterize species, using four functional traits and their associated categorical attributes (i) dietary mode (11 attributes; e.g., browser, grazer), (ii) preferred feeding habitat (16 attributes; e.g., grassland, woodland), (iii) preferred sheltering habitat (17 attributes; e.g., grassland, underground cavity), and (iv) activity time (7 attributes; e.g., diurnal, nocturnal, nocturnally dominated crepuscular). For each functional ecological trait we compare the death assemblage's recovered richness and abundance structure of constituent functional attributes with those of the source community, using Jaccard similarity, Spearman's rho, and the Probability of Interspecific Encounter (evenness). We use Monte Carlo simulations to evaluate whether these empirical comparisons are significantly different from expectations calculated from randomized sampling of species from the source community. Results indicate that although the Amboseli death assemblage is significantly overrepresented by large-bodied species relative to the Amboseli source community, it captures many functional dimensions of the ecosystem within expectations of a randomized collection of species. Additional resampling simulations and logistic regressions further illustrate that the size bias inherent to the Amboseli death assemblage is not a major driver of deviations between the functional ecological properties of the death assemblage and its source community. Finally, the Amboseli death assemblage also enhances our understanding of the mammal community by adding nine species and two functional attributes previously unknown from the ecosystem.
OI Du, Andrew/0000-0002-7381-5089
TC 17
Z9 17
SN 0094-8373
EI 1938-5331
PD FAL
PY 2014
VL 40
IS 4
BP 560
EP 583
DI 10.1666/13062
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology;
   Evolutionary Biology; Paleontology
UT WOS:000342967200004
ER

PT J
AU Sadighzadeh, Z
   Otero-Ferrer, JL
   Lombarte, A
   Fatemi, MR
   Tuset, VM
AF Sadighzadeh, Zahra
   Luis Otero-Ferrer, Jose
   Lombarte, Antoni
   Fatemi, Mohammad R.
   Tuset, Vctor Manuel
TI An approach to unraveling the coexistence of snappers (Lutjanidae) using
   otolith morphology
SO SCIENTIA MARINA
DT Article
DE otolith; morphology; biodiversity; functional ecology; snappers;
   Lutjanidae
ID INNER-EAR; FISH OTOLITHS; SPECIES IDENTIFICATION; DIFFERENT DEPTH; REEF
   FISHES; SIZE; SEA; TELEOSTS; BIOLOGY; SYSTEMATICS
AB The sagittae otolith morphology of marine fishes has been used in many ecomorphological studies to explain certain ecological adaptations of species to habitat. Our study compares the sagittal otolith shapes of ten species of snappers (Family Lutjanidae) inhabiting the Persian Gulf. We used a morphometric analysis of the otolith measurements (length, height, perimeter, area and weight) and of the ratio between the area of the sulcus acusticus and the area of the otolith (S:O). The otolith contour was also analysed using wavelets as a mathematical descriptor. Morphological variations in the otoliths were associated with the morphology and external colouration of snappers as well as ecological traits. An analysis of the interspecific S: O ratio suggested that the highest ratios occurred in snappers inhabiting shallower waters. A categorical multivariate analysis, including morphological, ecological and otolith size factors, showed that the species adapted to dim light conditions had a greater otolith perimeter. An analysis of variance of the otolith contour revealed zones with a higher interspecific variability, although only the antero-dorsal zone showed differing patterns. Although the otolith patterns appear to have a phylogenetic component, they might also be related to diel activity rhythms or to the light conditions in the habitat. The results of the study showed that variation in otolith morphology can be used to explain the coexistence of sympatric species.
RI Lombarte, Antoni/D-3142-2013; Tuset, Victor/A-9132-2019
OI Tuset, Victor/0000-0001-9032-2844
TC 15
Z9 15
SN 0214-8358
EI 1886-8134
PD SEP
PY 2014
VL 78
IS 3
BP 353
EP 362
DI 10.3989/scimar.03982.16C
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000342742100004
ER

PT J
AU Vaz, PG
   Dias, S
   Pinto, P
   Merten, EC
   Robinson, CT
   Warren, DR
   Rego, FC
AF Vaz, Pedro G.
   Dias, Susana
   Pinto, Paulo
   Merten, Eric C.
   Robinson, Christopher T.
   Warren, Dana R.
   Rego, Francisco C.
TI Effects of burn status and conditioning on colonization of wood by
   stream macroinvertebrates
SO FRESHWATER SCIENCE
DT Article
DE wildfire; wood debris; wood condition; invertebrates; Portugal; traits;
   community structure
ID LEAF-LITTER DECOMPOSITION; PUMICE-BED STREAMS; FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY;
   LOWLAND STREAM; COMMUNITY STRUCTURE; FOREST-STREAM; BENTHIC
   MACROINVERTEBRATES; INVERTEBRATE COMMUNITIES; AQUATIC INVERTEBRATES;
   REDUNDANCY ANALYSIS
AB The combination of changing climate and anthropogenic activities is increasing the probability of wildfire around the world. When fires occur in riparian zones, associated tree mortality can add wood directly to streams or wood may fall to the forest floor and remain there for some time before being transported into stream channels. Wood provides critical structure for aquatic macroinvertebrates, so our objectives were to assess the effects of wood burn status, conditioning, and their interaction on macroinvertebrate community composition, taxon and functional diversity, and trait affinities. We conducted a field experiment with pieces of freshly cut wood (length = 10 cm, diameter approximate to 7.5 cm) for which we first manipulated burn status (burned, unburned) and then, conditioned by placing burned and unburned wood directly into streams (no conditioning) or by leaving pieces in streams (water conditioning) or on the forest floor (soil conditioning) for a year before submergence. We used distance-based redundancy analysis to assess community structure by wood treatments and linear mixed-effects modeling to assess effects of wood treatments on taxon and functional diversity and trait affinity. Changes in wood quality resulting from fire may not alter macroinvertebrate community structure. Taxonomic and functional patterns of stream invertebrate colonization did not differ between burned and unburned wood, even after a year of incubation in the stream or on the forest floor. Conditioning status affected taxonomic composition, taxon and functional diversity, and trait affinities of wood invertebrate communities. The terrestrial legacy of soil conditioning was clearly important in structuring macroinvertebrate assemblages. Our results suggest that macroinvertebrate communities may be more sensitive to fire effects on the dynamics of wood input than to effects of fires on the wood itself.
RI Vaz, Pedro/C-6718-2008
OI Vaz, Pedro/0000-0002-2321-1287
TC 7
Z9 7
SN 2161-9549
EI 2161-9565
PD SEP
PY 2014
VL 33
IS 3
BP 832
EP 846
DI 10.1086/676657
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000340580700014
ER

PT J
AU Orlofske, JM
   Baird, DJ
AF Orlofske, Jessica M.
   Baird, Donald J.
TI A geometric morphometric approach to establish body-shape trait criteria
   for aquatic insects
SO FRESHWATER SCIENCE
DT Article
DE trait states; trait variation; biomonitoring; Ephemeroptera; Plecoptera;
   Trichoptera; Odonata; ecohydraulics
ID NEAR-BED FLOWS; SPECIES TRAITS; BENTHIC MACROINVERTEBRATES; LOTIC
   MACROINVERTEBRATES; REYNOLDS-NUMBER; STREAM; MORPHOLOGY; PATTERNS;
   HABITAT; RIVERS
AB Body shapes of aquatic insect larvae reflect phenotypic responses to complex environmental conditions and can be used to infer habitat properties and indicate natural and anthropogenic perturbations in river ecosystems. Investigation of relationships between body shape and physical-habitat characteristics has been restricted by a lack of an objective schema for quantitative characterization of body-shape variation. We present a functional ecological framework for body-shape classification based on defined criteria. We applied a geometric morphometric (GM) approach to the general classification of body shape in 4 morphologically diverse orders, Ephemeroptera (E), Plecoptera (P), Trichoptera (T), and Odonata (O) collected from 3 sites with contrasting hydrological and hydraulic characteristics. We describe a robust classification of body shapes for E, P, and O, which possess a compartmentalized body plan, and suggest a preliminary classification for T. We compared GM body shapes with body-shape trait states available in trait databases and found discordance between the 2 classifications. We explored the value of GM body shapes to describe taxon shape structure of reference sites and to detect variation reflecting physical properties of the sites. GM body-shape classes can augment the trait states already available and enhance inference regarding habitat status. Patterns in the shape strategies of aquatic insects, particularly EPO taxa, can be used to extrapolate shape information for other taxonomic groups. GM provides a stable shape classification that can contribute to the description of different ecological strategies of aquatic insects. Expanding the scope of shape information available for many taxonomic groups can improve our understanding of how organism phenotype relates to environmental conditions and supports traits-based assessment.
RI ANIKUZHIYIL, ANISH/Y-8609-2018; Baird, Donald/A-5267-2009
OI ANIKUZHIYIL, ANISH/0000-0001-9686-1283; 
TC 6
Z9 6
SN 2161-9549
EI 2161-9565
PD SEP
PY 2014
VL 33
IS 3
BP 978
EP 994
DI 10.1086/676912
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000340580700027
ER

PT J
AU Spitz, J
   Ridoux, V
   Brind'Amour, A
AF Spitz, Jerome
   Ridoux, Vincent
   Brind'Amour, Anik
TI Let's go beyond taxonomy in diet description: testing a trait-based
   approach to prey-predator relationships
SO JOURNAL OF ANIMAL ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE foraging strategy; fourth-corner method; functional ecology; marine
   mammals; prey selection; RLQ analysis
ID DOLPHINS TURSIOPS-TRUNCATUS; LIFE-HISTORY TRAITS; SPECIES TRAITS;
   4TH-CORNER PROBLEM; ENVIRONMENT RELATIONSHIPS; MEDITERRANEAN SEA;
   BODY-SIZE; BIODIVERSITY; SELECTION; ECOLOGY
AB 1. Understanding 'Why a prey is a prey for a given predator?' can be facilitated through trait-based approaches that identify linkages between prey and predator morphological and ecological characteristics and highlight key functions involved in prey selection.
   2. Enhanced understanding of the functional relationships between predators and their prey is now essential to go beyond the traditional taxonomic framework of dietary studies and to improve our knowledge of ecosystem functioning for wildlife conservation and management.
   3. We test the relevance of a three-matrix approach in foraging ecology among a marine mammal community in the northeast Atlantic to identify the key functional traits shaping prey selection processes regardless of the taxonomy of both the predators and prey.
   4. Our study reveals that prey found in the diet of marine mammals possess functional traits which are directly and significantly linked to predator characteristics, allowing the establishment of a functional typology of marine mammal-prey relationships. We found prey selection of marine mammals was primarily shaped by physiological and morphological traits of both predators and prey, confirming that energetic costs of foraging strategies and muscular performance are major drivers of prey selection in marine mammals.
   5. We demonstrate that trait-based approaches can provide a new definition of the resource needs of predators. This framework can be used to anticipate bottom-up effects on marine predator population dynamics and to identify predators which are sensitive to the loss of key prey functional traits when prey availability is reduced.
OI Brind'Amour, Anik/0000-0003-4072-2588; SPITZ, Jerome/0000-0003-2729-2413
TC 22
Z9 23
SN 0021-8790
EI 1365-2656
PD SEP
PY 2014
VL 83
IS 5
BP 1137
EP 1148
DI 10.1111/1365-2656.12218
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Zoology
UT WOS:000340877700014
PM 24645977
ER

PT J
AU Messmer, V
   Blowes, SA
   Jones, GP
   Munday, PL
AF Messmer, Vanessa
   Blowes, Shane A.
   Jones, Geoffrey P.
   Munday, Philip L.
TI Experimental evaluation of diversity-productivity relationships in a
   coral reef fish assemblage
SO OECOLOGIA
DT Article
DE Diversity theory; Diversity loss; Competition; Complementarity;
   Redundancy
ID SPECIES-RICHNESS; ECOSYSTEM FUNCTION; PLANT DIVERSITY; BIODIVERSITY
   LOSS; FUNCTIONAL REDUNDANCY; TEMPORAL VARIABILITY; GRASSLAND ECOSYSTEMS;
   MARINE BIODIVERSITY; COMMUNITY STRUCTURE; CURRENT KNOWLEDGE
AB The global decline in biodiversity is causing increasing concern about the effects of biodiversity loss on ecosystem services such as productivity. Biodiversity has been hypothesised to be important in maintaining productivity of biological assemblages because niche complementarity and facilitation among the constituent species can result in more efficient use of resources. However, these conclusions are primarily based on studies with plant communities, and the relationship between diversity and productivity at higher trophic levels is largely unknown, especially in the marine environment. Here, we used a manipulative field experiment to test the effects of species richness and species identity on biomass accumulation in coral reef fish assemblages at Lizard Island. Small patch reefs were stocked with a total of 30 juveniles belonging to three planktivorous damselfish (genus Pomacentrus) according to three different levels of fish species richness (one, two and three species) and seven different combinations of fish species. Species richness had no effect on the relative growth in this assemblage after 18 days, but relative growth differed among individual fish species and the different combinations of species. Patterns of increase in biomass were best explained by species-specific differences and variable effects of intra- and interspecific competition on growth. These results suggest that niche complementarity and facilitation are not the most influential drivers of total productivity within this guild of planktivorous fishes. Total productivity may be resilient to declining reef fish biodiversity, but this will depend on which species are lost and on the life-history traits of remaining species.
RI jones, geoffrey/E-9306-2010; Messmer, Vanessa/B-5459-2015; Munday,
   Philip/F-5443-2011
OI jones, geoffrey/0000-0002-6244-1245; Messmer,
   Vanessa/0000-0002-5604-6273; Munday, Philip/0000-0001-9725-2498; Blowes,
   Shane/0000-0001-6310-3670
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 0029-8549
EI 1432-1939
PD SEP
PY 2014
VL 176
IS 1
BP 237
EP 249
DI 10.1007/s00442-014-2992-9
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000340680100020
PM 24962681
ER

PT J
AU Bermudez, R
   Retuerto, R
AF Bermudez, R.
   Retuerto, R.
TI A sunny day at the beach: Ecophysiological assessment of the
   photosynthetic adaptability of coastal dune perennial herbs by
   chlorophyll fluorescence parameters
SO PHOTOSYNTHETICA
DT Article
DE Eryngium maritimum; Euphorbia paralias; light curve; Matthiola sinuata;
   nonphotochemical quenching; Pancratium maritimum; photochemical
   quenching; quantum yield of photosystem II
ID ARBUSCULAR MYCORRHIZAL FUNGI; SUB-ARCTIC QUEBEC; SEMIARID ENVIRONMENT;
   SAND DUNE; FUNCTIONAL CONVERGENCE; EUPHORBIA-PARALIAS;
   PLANT-DISTRIBUTION; SALINITY STRESS; CROP PRODUCTION; LIGHT
AB Light is critical in determining plant structure and functioning in dune ecosystems, which are characterised by high incident and reflected radiation. Light variations demand great plasticity of the photosynthetic apparatus. This study assessed the phenotypic plasticity of foredune species by analysing their light response and dark recovery curves measured under field conditions. We also addressed the question how coexisting species, structurally distinct, differed in their photochemical efficiency in response to short-term changes in light. Finally, we examined how the varying intensity of stressors operating along a dune gradient affected responses to light. The species differed in light use strategies but showed similar patterns of the dark recovery. Species differences in photochemistry varied seasonally, with species being winter specialists, summer specialist or generalists. Some aspects of their photochemistry varied significantly along the gradient. Unexpectedly, other traits did not vary as predicted. For example, changes in light efficiency of plants along the gradient were not consistent with assumed directional changes in the severity of stressors. The different light use strategies observed in coexisting species did not conform to the prediction that stressors constrain the range of possible functional designs in harsh environments. However, the species followed very similar patterns of post-illumination recovery, which suggests that evolutionary pressures might be acting to maintain similar recovery mechanisms. Our results indicated that dune gradients might be nondirectional, which determines unpredictable patterns of variation in leaf traits along the dune gradient. Seasonal differences in the relative performance may allow species to coexist where otherwise one species would exclude the other.
RI Retuerto, Ruben/B-4853-2008
OI Retuerto, Ruben/0000-0002-9879-5512
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 0300-3604
EI 1573-9058
PD SEP
PY 2014
VL 52
IS 3
BP 444
EP 455
DI 10.1007/s11099-014-0049-2
SC Plant Sciences
UT WOS:000340623800015
ER

PT J
AU Whatley, MH
   van Loon, EE
   Vonk, JA
   van der Geest, HG
   Admiraal, W
AF Whatley, Merrin H.
   van Loon, E. Emiel
   Vonk, J. Arie
   van der Geest, Harm G.
   Admiraal, Wim
TI The role of emergent vegetation in structuring aquatic insect
   communities in peatland drainage ditches
SO AQUATIC ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE Aquatic insects; Emergent vegetation; Eutrophication; Habitat filters;
   Life history strategies
ID BENTHIC INVERTEBRATES; SPECIES TRAITS; BIOTIC INDEX; NETHERLANDS;
   WETLANDS; HABITAT; MACROPHYTE; STRATEGIES; MANAGEMENT; ABUNDANCE
AB Availability of macrophyte habitat is recognized as an important driver of aquatic insect communities in peatland drainage ditches; however, eutrophication can lead to the decline of submerged vegetation. While emergent vegetation is able to persist in eutrophicated ditches, vegetation removal, carried out during ditch maintenance, can reduce the availability of this habitat. In this study, we applied the landscape filtering approach to determine whether the absence of emergent vegetation is a habitat filter which structures aquatic insect communities in peatland drainage ditches under different trophic conditions. To this end, a field study was carried out in one mesotrophic (Naardermeer) and one eutrophic (Wormer and Jisperveld) peatland in the province of North Holland, The Netherlands. We assigned life history strategies to insect species and applied linear mixed models and redundancy analyses to taxonomic and functional aquatic insect community data. Our results indicate that while differences between peatlands primarily determine the species pool within each wetland, emergent vegetation acted as a secondary filter by structuring functional community composition within ditches. The eutrophic peatland was dominated by insects adapted to abiotic extremes, while species with good dispersal abilities were strongly related to emergent vegetation cover. This study demonstrates the applicability of life history strategies to provide insight into the filtering of species due to availability of emergent macrophyte habitat. To ensure greater diversity of insect communities in ditch habitats, it is recommended that some vegetation be spared during maintenance to leave patches from which insect recolonization can occur.
RI Vonk, Jan Arie/B-1105-2009
OI Vonk, Jan Arie/0000-0002-8803-1148; van Loon, E.
   Emiel/0000-0002-8895-0427
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 1386-2588
EI 1573-5125
PD SEP
PY 2014
VL 48
IS 3
BP 267
EP 283
DI 10.1007/s10452-014-9482-3
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000340494400003
ER

PT J
AU Dineen, AA
   Fraiser, ML
   Sheehan, PM
AF Dineen, Ashley A.
   Fraiser, Margaret L.
   Sheehan, Peter M.
TI Quantifying functional diversity in pre- and post-extinction
   paleocommunities: A test of ecological restructuring after the
   end-Permian mass extinction
SO EARTH-SCIENCE REVIEWS
DT Article
DE Permo-Triassic; Mass extinction; Recovery; Marine paleoecology;
   Restructuring; Functional diversity
ID PHANEROZOIC BIODIVERSITY CRISES; EARLY TRIASSIC RECOVERY; ORGANIC-CARBON
   FLUXES; WESTERN UNITED-STATES; MARINE FOSSIL RECORD; BIOTIC RECOVERY;
   ECOSYSTEM FUNCTION; AMMONOID RECOVERY; SIBERIAN TRAPS; CORAL-REEFS
AB A review of the literature shows that understanding of biotic restructuring following the Permo-Triassic mass extinction (PTME) is typically based on only a few components of the ecosystem, such as taxonomic diversity, and that Early Triassic paleocommunities previously have been considered fully recovered when previous dominance and diversity were regained. To more fully characterize Triassic ecologic restructuring, we propose herein that paleoecologists take into account functional diversity (i.e. abundance distribution of genera in functional space). To test the viability of this metric, we quantified here for the first time functional richness (number of functional groups) and functional evenness (distribution of abundance across functional groups) in five different local paleocommunities from classic Permian and Triassic sections using a quantitative ten-trait ecospace model. Functional richness was low in local paleocommunities immediately after the FTME, but increased to high levels by the Middle Triassic. In contrast, functional evenness was low in the Middle Permian, but high in all of the Triassic paleocommunities. Overall, the results of this analysis indicate that taxonomic and ecological diversity was decoupled after the PTME, in that local taxonomic diversity increased quickly in several Early Triassic paleocommunities, but local functional diversity did not return to high levels until the Middle Triassic (Anisian). (C) 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
TC 19
Z9 19
SN 0012-8252
EI 1872-6828
PD SEP
PY 2014
VL 136
BP 339
EP 349
DI 10.1016/j.earscirev.2014.06.002
SC Geology
UT WOS:000340303800014
ER

PT J
AU Robinson, JPW
   White, ER
   Wiwchar, LD
   Claar, DC
   Suraci, JP
   Baum, JK
AF Robinson, James P. W.
   White, Easton R.
   Wiwchar, Logan D.
   Claar, Danielle C.
   Suraci, Justin P.
   Baum, Julia K.
TI The limitations of diversity metrics in directing global marine
   conservation
SO MARINE POLICY
DT Article
DE Evenness; Functional diversity; Macroecology; Marine fish; Reef
   ecosystems; Underwater visual census
ID SPECIES RICHNESS; BIODIVERSITY; ABUNDANCE; HOTSPOTS; FISHES;
   BIOGEOGRAPHY; SELECTION; EVENNESS
AB Biodiversity hotspots have been used extensively in setting conservation priorities for marine ecosystems. A recent Nature publication claims to have uncovered new latitudinal gradients in the evenness of reef communities and new reef hotspots based on functional diversity. Simulation models show that the purported evenness gradient is a mathematical inevitability of differences in species richness and detectability between vastly different marine ecosystems, namely 'reefs' in tropical, temperate, and polar regions. Constraints on evenness, along with disparity amongst communities in possible functional traits, cast doubt on the utility of global functional diversity comparisons for management of marine systems. (C) 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
OI Claar, Danielle/0000-0003-2389-111X; Robinson,
   James/0000-0002-7614-1112; White, Easton/0000-0002-0768-9555
TC 6
Z9 6
SN 0308-597X
EI 1872-9460
PD SEP
PY 2014
VL 48
BP 123
EP 125
DI 10.1016/j.marpol.2014.03.012
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; International Relations
UT WOS:000336697000014
ER

PT J
AU Vigneron, A
   Cruaud, P
   Roussel, EG
   Pignet, P
   Caprais, JC
   Callac, N
   Ciobanu, MC
   Godfroy, A
   Cragg, BA
   Parkes, JR
   Van Nostrand, JD
   He, ZL
   Zhou, JZ
   Toffin, L
AF Vigneron, Adrien
   Cruaud, Perrine
   Roussel, Erwan G.
   Pignet, Patricia
   Caprais, Jean-Claude
   Callac, Nolwenn
   Ciobanu, Maria-Cristina
   Godfroy, Anne
   Cragg, Barry A.
   Parkes, John R.
   Van Nostrand, Joy D.
   He, Zhili
   Zhou, Jizhong
   Toffin, Laurent
TI Phylogenetic and Functional Diversity of Microbial Communities
   Associated with Subsurface Sediments of the Sonora Margin, Guaymas Basin
SO PLOS ONE
DT Article
ID DEEP SUBSEAFLOOR SEDIMENTS; MARINE-SEDIMENTS; SEA-FLOOR; ARCHAEAL
   COMMUNITIES; GROWTH-RATE; GULF; RNA; CALIFORNIA; BIOSPHERE; NITROGEN
AB Subsurface sediments of the Sonora Margin (Guayma Basin), located in proximity of active cold seep sites were explored. The taxonomic and functional diversity of bacterial and archaeal communities were investigated from 1 to 10 meters below the seafloor. Microbial community structure and abundance and distribution of dominant populations were assessed using complementary molecular approaches (Ribosomal Intergenic Spacer Analysis, 16S rRNA libraries and quantitative PCR with an extensive primers set) and correlated to comprehensive geochemical data. Moreover the metabolic potentials and functional traits of the microbial community were also identified using the GeoChip functional gene microarray and metabolic rates. The active microbial community structure in the Sonora Margin sediments was related to deep subsurface ecosystems (Marine Benthic Groups B and D, Miscellaneous Crenarchaeotal Group, Chloroflexi and Candidate divisions) and remained relatively similar throughout the sediment section, despite defined biogeochemical gradients. However, relative abundances of bacterial and archaeal dominant lineages were significantly correlated with organic carbon quantity and origin. Consistently, metabolic pathways for the degradation and assimilation of this organic carbon as well as genetic potentials for the transformation of detrital organic matters, hydrocarbons and recalcitrant substrates were detected, suggesting that chemoorganotrophic microorganisms may dominate the microbial community of the Sonora Margin subsurface sediments.
RI Anne, Godfroy/J-9897-2017; Van Nostrand, Joy/F-1740-2016; Cragg,
   Barry/D-2690-2009; Godfroy, Anne/X-1992-2018
OI Anne, Godfroy/0000-0003-0483-4160; Van Nostrand,
   Joy/0000-0001-9548-6450; Godfroy, Anne/0000-0003-0483-4160; He,
   Zhili/0000-0001-8225-7333; Ciobanu, Maria-Cristina/0000-0002-7504-2358;
   Cruaud, Perrine/0000-0001-8628-3600; Callac,
   Nolwenn/0000-0002-7578-3455; Roussel, Erwan/0000-0002-8735-5597
TC 14
Z9 14
SN 1932-6203
PD AUG 6
PY 2014
VL 9
IS 8
AR e104427
DI 10.1371/journal.pone.0104427
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000339995100071
PM 25099369
ER

PT J
AU Gasparini, Z
   O'Gorman, JP
AF Gasparini, Z.
   O'Gorman, J. P.
TI A NEW SPECIES OF PLIOSAURUS (SAUROPTERYGIA, PLESIOSAURIA) FROM THE UPPER
   JURASSIC OF NORTHWESTERN PATAGONIA, ARGENTINA
SO AMEGHINIANA
DT Article
DE Pliosauridae; Pliosaurus patagonicus sp nov.; Tithonian; Upper Jurassic;
   Neuquen Province; Argentina
ID SOUTHERN NEUQUEN BASIN; CRANIAL ANATOMY; CROCODYLIFORMES THALATTOSUCHIA;
   CRICOSAURUS-ARAUCANENSIS; REPTILIA SAUROPTERYGIA; PHYLOGENETIC POSITION;
   MARINE REPTILES; AMMONITE FAUNA; STRATIGRAPHY; MORPHOLOGY
AB Pliosaurus patagonicus sp. nov., from the middle Tithonian, Vaca Muerta Formation, Neuquen Province, Argentina, is described on an autapomorphic trait -i.e., the distance between the posterior functional alveolus and coronoid eminence (300 mm) equivalent to the last fourteen alveoli- and a unique combination of characters: short and robust mandibular symphysis with six pairs of functional alveoli; in lateral view the dorsoventral height is almost constant along the symphysis; low coronoid eminence and mandibular rami almost straight. As in other species of Pliosaurus genus the new taxon has trihedral teeth but the typical lateral expansion of the mandibular symphysis is missing. This new record reinforces the hypothesis of a trend toward the shortening of the mandibular symphysis observed in late Kimmeridgian-Tithonian species from the northern hemisphere. The presence of the macropredator Pliosaurus patagonicus sp. nov. in a protected marine environment close to the coast may be interpreted as the result of predatory and/or reproductive behaviors.
TC 6
Z9 6
SN 0002-7014
EI 1851-8044
PD AUG 1
PY 2014
VL 51
IS 4
BP 269
EP 283
DI 10.5710/AMGH.03.04.2014.2225
SC Paleontology
UT WOS:000342962900001
ER

PT J
AU Lohbeck, M
   Poorter, L
   Martinez-Ramos, M
   Rodriguez-Velazquez, J
   van Breugel, M
   Bongers, F
AF Lohbeck, Madelon
   Poorter, Lourens
   Martinez-Ramos, Miguel
   Rodriguez-Velazquez, Jorge
   van Breugel, Michiel
   Bongers, Frans
TI Changing drivers of species dominance during tropical forest succession
SO FUNCTIONAL ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE Chiapas; environmental filtering; functional convergence/divergence;
   functional traits; kurtosis; light gradient partitioning; Mexico;
   secondary succession
ID PHYLOGENETIC COMMUNITY STRUCTURE; PLANT FUNCTIONAL TRAITS; LEAF
   LIFE-SPAN; RAIN-FOREST; COMPETITIVE-EXCLUSION; SECONDARY SUCCESSION;
   RELATIVE IMPORTANCE; COASTAL CALIFORNIA; ASSEMBLY RULES; DIVERSITY
AB 1. Deterministic theories predict that local communities assemble from a regional species pool based on niche differences, thus by plant functional adaptations. We tested whether functional traits can also explain patterns in species dominance among the suite of co-occurring species.
   2. We predicted that along a gradient of secondary succession, the main driver of species dominance changes from environmental filtering in the relatively harsh (dry and hot) early successional conditions, towards increased competitive interactions and limiting similarity in later successional conditions (when light is limited).
   3. We used the Kurtosis (K) (a measure of peakedness) of the functional trait distribution of secondary forest communities in high-diversity tropical rain forest in Chiapas, Mexico. The forests ranged 1-25 years in age, and we used eight functional leaf traits related to a plants' carbon, water and heat balance. We calculated the functional trait distribution based on species dominance, where trait values were weighted by species' relative basal area, as well as based on species presence, all species counting once. 'K-ratio' was subsequently computed by dividing kurtosis based on species dominance by kurtosis based on species presence. If the K-ratio is high, the dominant species are functionally similar and we interpreted this as environmentally driven functional convergence allowing species to become dominant. If the K-ratio is small, dominant species are a functionally dissimilar subset of the species present and we interpreted this as competitively driven functional divergence allowing species to become dominant.
   4. We found that in early succession, dominant species represent a functionally narrow subset of species with similar traits, and in late succession, dominant species increasingly represent a wide subset of the species present. This trend was found for traits that reflect photosynthetic performance and light capture, and indicates increased competition for light with succession. No trend was found for traits that indicate defence against herbivory, suggesting no successional changes in herbivore pressure.
   5. Synthesis. This is one of the first studies showing that drivers of species dominance change along a gradient of secondary succession. During the early successional time window we evaluated, the importance of environmental filtering as a driving force fades away rapidly, and the importance of niche partitioning for species dominance starts to emerge.
RI Lohbeck, Madelon/M-6390-2014
OI Lohbeck, Madelon/0000-0002-3959-1800; van Breugel,
   Michiel/0000-0003-2778-7803
TC 39
Z9 42
SN 0269-8463
EI 1365-2435
PD AUG
PY 2014
VL 28
IS 4
BP 1052
EP 1058
DI 10.1111/1365-2435.12240
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000340673900028
ER

PT J
AU Lawes, MJ
   Richardson, SJ
   Clarke, PJ
   Midgley, JJ
   McGlone, MS
   Bellingham, PJ
AF Lawes, Michael J.
   Richardson, Sarah J.
   Clarke, Peter J.
   Midgley, Jeremy J.
   McGlone, Matt S.
   Bellingham, Peter J.
TI Bark thickness does not explain the different susceptibility of
   Australian and New Zealand temperate rain forests to anthropogenic fire
SO JOURNAL OF BIOGEOGRAPHY
DT Article
DE Australia; bark ratio; cool temperate forests; epicormic buds; fire
   resilience; fire resistance; New Zealand; relative bark thickness;
   southern conifers
ID COASTAL DUNE FOREST; ANGIOSPERM DOMINANCE; TROPICAL SAVANNA; HAWKES BAY;
   D DON; TREES; ECOLOGY; REGENERATION; PERSISTENCE; CONIFER
AB Aim Anthropogenic fires caused New Zealand's temperate rain forests to decline rapidly from 80% to 50% cover after Polynesian arrival. In contrast, Australian temperate rain forests have remained stable in spite of a longer history of fire and human occupation. We evaluate whether New Zealand's conifer-dominated forests declined because they lack fire resistance traits. We predicted that New Zealand species should have thinner bark than their Australian counterparts, and slower growing conifers should have relatively thicker bark than angiosperms.
   Location Temperate rain forests of south-eastern Australia, Tasmania and New Zealand.
   Methods We examined the ratio of bark thickness to stem diameter (relative bark thickness) as a standardized index (by tree size) of fire resistance. Nonlinear power models were fitted to examine trends in relative bark thickness between trees from New Zealand and Australia. Bark thickness was also compared between species pairs and congeners and by phylogenetically corrected ANOVA.
   Results Although angiosperms and gymnosperms in New Zealand had thin bark in a global context, they had significantly thicker bark than their Australian counterparts. Bark thickened more rapidly for small trees in New Zealand but declined with increasing stem diameter. Allocation to bark thickness was greater for larger stems in Australia. New Zealand gymnosperms had the thickest bark of all species examined.
   Main conclusions Fire resistance is a complex syndrome comprising functional traits that ensure protection (resistance - bark) from and recovery (resilience - resprouting) after fire. Thin bark in temperate rain forests suggests weak selection by fire on bark traits. However, the stability of Australian temperate forests in a flammable landscape emphasizes the importance of resprouting, especially basal resprouting, to forest persistence after fire. New Zealand forests do not resprout after fire and lack the fire resistance traits required for recovery from repeated anthropogenic fires.
RI Richardson, Sarah/D-3353-2015
OI Richardson, Sarah/0000-0002-4097-0381
TC 14
Z9 14
SN 0305-0270
EI 1365-2699
PD AUG
PY 2014
VL 41
IS 8
BP 1467
EP 1477
DI 10.1111/jbi.12292
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Physical Geography
UT WOS:000339665900004
ER

PT J
AU Kruger, F
   Clare, EL
   Greif, S
   Siemers, BM
   Symondson, WOC
   Sommer, RS
AF Krueger, F.
   Clare, E. L.
   Greif, S.
   Siemers, B. M.
   Symondson, W. O. C.
   Sommer, R. S.
TI An integrative approach to detect subtle trophic niche differentiation
   in the sympatric trawling bat species Myotis dasycneme and Myotis
   daubentonii
SO MOLECULAR ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE adaptation; bats; diet analysis; functional morphology
ID INSECTIVOROUS BATS; FOOD-HABITS; CHIROPTERA VESPERTILIONIDAE;
   RHINOLOPHUS-FERRUMEQUINUM; CHARACTER DISPLACEMENT; FORAGING BEHAVIOR;
   BITE PERFORMANCE; DARWINS FINCHES; ARTHROPOD PREY; GENUS MYOTIS
AB Bats are well known for species richness and ecological diversity, and thus, they provide a good opportunity to study relationships and interaction between species. To assess interactions, we consider distinct traits that are probably to be triggered by niche shape and evolutionary processes. We present data on the trophic niche differentiation between two sympatric European trawling bat species, Myotis dasycneme and Myotis daubentonii, incorporating a wide spectrum of methodological approaches. We measure morphological traits involved in foraging and prey handling performance including bite force, weightlifting capacity and wing morphology. We then measure resulting prey consumption using both morphological and molecular diet analyses. These species closely resemble each other in morphological traits, however, subtle but significant differences were apparent in bite force and lift capacity, which are related to differences in basic body and head size. Both morphological and molecular diet analyses show strong niche overlap. We detected subtle differences in less frequent prey items, as well as differences in the exploitation of terrestrial and aquatic-based prey groups. Myotis dasycneme feeds more on aquatic prey, like Chironomidae and their pupal stages, or on the aquatic moth Acentria ephemerella. Myotis daubentonii feeds more on terrestrial prey, like Brachycera, or Coleoptera. This suggests that these bats use different microhabitats within the habitat where they co-occur.
OI Greif, Stefan/0000-0002-0139-2435
TC 25
Z9 25
SN 0962-1083
EI 1365-294X
PD AUG
PY 2014
VL 23
IS 15
SI SI
BP 3657
EP 3671
DI 10.1111/mec.12512
SC Biochemistry & Molecular Biology; Environmental Sciences & Ecology;
   Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000339487300006
PM 24164379
ER

PT J
AU Madin, JS
   Baird, AH
   Dornelas, M
   Connolly, SR
AF Madin, Joshua S.
   Baird, Andrew H.
   Dornelas, Maria
   Connolly, Sean R.
TI Mechanical vulnerability explains size-dependent mortality of reef
   corals
SO ECOLOGY LETTERS
DT Article
DE Biomechanics; colonial; demography; disturbance; life history;
   mortality; reef coral
ID GREAT-BARRIER-REEF; CLIMATE-CHANGE; HYDRODYNAMIC DISTURBANCES; OCEAN
   ACIDIFICATION; COMMUNITY ECOLOGY; FUNCTIONAL TRAITS; BUILDING CORALS;
   POPULATION; AGE; CONSEQUENCES
AB Understanding life history and demographic variation among species within communities is a central ecological goal. Mortality schedules are especially important in ecosystems where disturbance plays a major role in structuring communities, such as coral reefs. Here, we test whether a trait-based, mechanistic model of mechanical vulnerability in corals can explain mortality schedules. Specifically, we ask whether species that become increasingly vulnerable to hydrodynamic dislodgment as they grow have bathtub-shaped mortality curves, whereas species that remain mechanically stable have decreasing mortality rates with size, as predicted by classical life history theory for reef corals. We find that size-dependent mortality is highly consistent between species with the same growth form and that the shape of size-dependent mortality for each growth form can be explained by mechanical vulnerability. Our findings highlight the feasibility of predicting assemblage-scale mortality patterns on coral reefs with trait-based approaches.
RI Dornelas, Maria/E-3595-2010; Baird, Andrew/C-8449-2009
OI Dornelas, Maria/0000-0003-2077-7055; Baird, Andrew/0000-0001-8504-4077;
   Madin, Joshua/0000-0002-5005-6227; Connolly, Sean/0000-0003-1537-0859
TC 47
Z9 47
SN 1461-023X
EI 1461-0248
PD AUG
PY 2014
VL 17
IS 8
BP 1008
EP 1015
DI 10.1111/ele.12306
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000339101100013
PM 24894390
ER

PT J
AU Joseph, GS
   Seymour, CL
   Cumming, GS
   Cumming, DHM
   Mahlangu, Z
AF Joseph, Grant S.
   Seymour, Colleen L.
   Cumming, Graeme S.
   Cumming, David H. M.
   Mahlangu, Zacheus
TI Termite Mounds Increase Functional Diversity of Woody Plants in African
   Savannas
SO ECOSYSTEMS
DT Article
DE disturbances of herbivory and fire; functional diversity; functional
   groups; Macrotermes; resource patches; soil resources; spatial
   heterogeneity
ID MIOMBO WOODLAND; COASTAL CALIFORNIA; ECOSYSTEM FUNCTION; COMMUNITY
   ECOLOGY; TRAITS; HETEROGENEITY; FRAMEWORK; ISLANDS; TREES; RESILIENCE
AB Fine-scale spatial heterogeneity influences biodiversity and ecosystem productivity at many scales. In savanna systems, Macrotermes termites, through forming spatially explicit mounds with unique woody plant assemblages, emerge as important sources of such heterogeneity. Despite a growing consensus regarding the importance of functional diversity (FD) to ecosystem processes, no study has quantified how termite mounds affect woody plant FD. We address whether termite mounds alter the distribution of functional traits, and increase FD of woody plant communities within Africa's largest savanna woodland, the 2.7 million km(2) miombo system. Using plant traits that change according to soil resources (for example, water and nutrients), and disturbance (for example, fire and elephant herbivory), we identified response functional groups and compared relative representation of these groups between mound and matrix habitats. We also asked whether mound and matrix habitats differed in their contribution to FD within the system. Although species representing most functional groups were found in both mound and matrix habitats, relative abundance of functional groups differed between mound and matrix. Mound plant assemblages had greater response diversity to soil resources than matrix plots, but there was no difference in response diversity to disturbance. High trait values on mounds included tree height, leaf nitrogen, phosphorus, and palatability. Species with root ectomycorrhizae dominated the matrix. In conclusion, these small patches of nutrient-enriched substrate emerge as drivers of FD in above-ground woody plant communities.
RI Cumming, Graeme/B-6551-2008
OI Cumming, Graeme/0000-0002-3678-1326; Seymour,
   Colleen/0000-0002-6729-2576
TC 26
Z9 26
SN 1432-9840
EI 1435-0629
PD AUG
PY 2014
VL 17
IS 5
BP 808
EP 819
DI 10.1007/s10021-014-9761-9
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000339418400005
ER

PT J
AU Culhane, FE
   Briers, RA
   Tett, P
   Fernandes, TF
AF Culhane, Fiona E.
   Briers, Robert A.
   Tett, Paul
   Fernandes, Teresa F.
TI Structural and functional indices show similar performance in marine
   ecosystem quality assessment
SO ECOLOGICAL INDICATORS
DT Article
DE Biotic index; Benthic macroinvertebrate; Traits analysis; Functional
   indices; Structural indices
ID TRAITS ANALYSIS BTA; LARGE EUROPEAN RIVERS; BIOLOGICAL TRAITS;
   INVERTEBRATE TRAITS; BENTHIC ECOSYSTEMS; BIOTIC INDEXES; ECOLOGICAL
   QUALITY; HABITAT QUALITY; SPECIES TRAITS; FRESH-WATER
AB Reliable ecosystem quality assessment of marine environments is increasingly important due to mounting pressures attributable to human activities. Biotic indices are widely used in studies to describe communities and indicate the ecological state of systems. This study focuses on benthic macroinvertebrate-based biotic indices for the assessment of ecosystem health. Indices used in ecosystem health assessment in the marine environment have mainly focussed on measuring structural components of the system while more recently the measurement of functional components has been highlighted. In this study the performance of traditional diversity indices based on structural components of benthic macroinvertebrate communities, indices developed for the EU Water Framework Directive, and indices which are based on functional biological traits of species were compared. The results indicated that while functional indices may provide a more detailed assessment of the benthic communities than structural indices, the overall outcome is broadly similar for both types of indices. This suggests measurement of functional indices may be unnecessary for routine monitoring purposes, although they may have value in revealing more specific aspects of change in a system. (C) 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
RI Fernandes, T/C-6105-2009; Briers, Robert/B-5810-2014
OI Fernandes, T/0000-0002-8541-598X; Briers, Robert/0000-0003-0341-1203;
   Culhane, Fiona/0000-0002-0488-1277
TC 10
Z9 10
SN 1470-160X
EI 1872-7034
PD AUG
PY 2014
VL 43
BP 271
EP 280
DI 10.1016/j.ecolind.2014.03.009
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000336952300027
ER

PT J
AU Mitchell, JS
   Makovicky, PJ
AF Mitchell, Jonathan S.
   Makovicky, Peter J.
TI Low ecological disparity in Early Cretaceous birds
SO PROCEEDINGS OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY B-BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES
DT Article
DE Jehol Biota; bird evolution; functional diversity; palaeoecology
ID MESOZOIC BIRDS; FOSSIL RECORD; TRAIT EVOLUTION; GIANT BIRD; DIVERSITY;
   CHINA; DIET; DIVERSIFICATION; RADIATION; MAMMALS
AB Ecological divergence is thought to be coupled with evolutionary radiations, yet the strength of this coupling is unclear. When birds diversified ecologically has received much less attention than their hotly debated crown divergence time. Here, we quantify how accurately skeletal morphology can predict ecology in living and extinct birds, and show that the earliest known assemblage of birds (=pygostylians) from the Jehol Biota (approximate to 125 Ma) was substantially impoverished ecologically. The Jehol avifauna has few representatives of highly preservable ecomorphs (e. g. aquatic forms) and a notable lack of ecomorphological overlap with the pterosaur assemblage (e. g. no large or aerially foraging pygostylians). Comparisons of the Jehol functional diversity with modern and subfossil avian assemblages show that taphonomic bias alone cannot explain the ecomorphological impoverishment. However, evolutionary simulations suggest that the constrained ecological diversity of the Early Cretaceous pygostylians is consistent with what is expected from a relatively young radiation. Regardless of the proximate biological explanation, the anomalously low functional diversity of the Jehol birds is evidence both for ecological vacancies in Cretaceous ecosystems, which were subsequently filled by the radiation of crown Aves, and for discordance between taxonomic richness and ecological diversity in the best-known Mesozoic ecosystem.
TC 18
Z9 19
SN 0962-8452
EI 1471-2954
PD JUL 22
PY 2014
VL 281
IS 1787
AR 20140608
DI 10.1098/rspb.2014.0608
SC Life Sciences & Biomedicine - Other Topics; Environmental Sciences &
   Ecology; Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000338335800017
PM 24870044
ER

PT J
AU Campbell, JL
   Donato, DC
AF Campbell, John L.
   Donato, Daniel C.
TI Trait-based approaches to linking vegetation and food webs in
   early-seral forests of the Pacific Northwest
SO FOREST ECOLOGY AND MANAGEMENT
DT Article
DE Pacific Northwest; Early-seral; Trait analysis; Herbivory; Trophic
   transfer; Food webs
ID LEAF LIFE-SPAN; MANAGED FORESTS; COASTAL OREGON; WESTERN OREGON; PLANT
   TRAITS; ECOSYSTEMS; HERBIVORY; PATTERNS; BIODIVERSITY; CANOPY
AB Both the structure and composition of naturally generated early-seral forests in the Pacific Northwest (PNW) can be profoundly different than that of more developed forest seres, especially in the period after a major disturbance but before conifers re-develop a closed canopy. While it is reasonable to suggest that the unique structure and composition of early-seral forests in the PNW give rise to equally unique functionality, identifying such linkages beyond that inferred by empirical observation is understandably difficult. To address this challenge, we explore the utility of a trait-based approach to identify the vegetation traits most strongly altered by canopy-opening disturbances (using wildfires as an example), and link these traits to secondary production and subsequent food webs. Preliminary analysis, based on original and literature-derived data, suggests that (1) Lepidoptera production, the primary prey base for forest birds in the PNW, is positively correlated with specific leaf area (SLA) which is higher in stands recently opened by canopy disturbance and (2) small mammal production, an important prey base for meso-predators, is positively correlated with SLA, which is higher in stands recently opened by canopy disturbance. These initial results lay the framework for linking disturbance type, disturbance severity, and subsequent successional pathways to trophic processes uniquely provided by the early-seral condition. (C) 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
TC 9
Z9 9
SN 0378-1127
EI 1872-7042
PD JUL 15
PY 2014
VL 324
BP 172
EP 178
DI 10.1016/j.foreco.2013.11.020
SC Forestry
UT WOS:000339129500020
ER

PT J
AU Kovalenko, KE
   Brady, VJ
   Ciborowski, JJH
   Ilyushkin, S
   Johnson, LB
AF Kovalenko, Katya E.
   Brady, Valerie J.
   Ciborowski, Jan J. H.
   Ilyushkin, Sergey
   Johnson, Lucinda B.
TI Functional Changes in Littoral Macroinvertebrate Communities in Response
   to Watershed-Level Anthropogenic Stress
SO PLOS ONE
DT Article
ID MULTIPLE SPATIAL SCALES; SPECIES TRAITS; GREAT-LAKES; ENVIRONMENTAL
   INDICATORS; LAND-COVER; BIODIVERSITY; DIVERSITY; THRESHOLDS; ECOSYSTEMS;
   ECOLOGY
AB Watershed-scale anthropogenic stressors have profound effects on aquatic communities. Although several functional traits of stream macroinvertebrates change predictably in response to land development and urbanization, little is known about macroinvertebrate functional responses in lakes. We assessed functional community structure, functional diversity (Rao's quadratic entropy) and voltinism in macroinvertebrate communities sampled across the full gradient of anthropogenic stress in Laurentian Great Lakes coastal wetlands. Functional diversity and voltinism significantly decreased with increasing development, whereas agriculture had smaller or non-significant effects. Functional community structure was affected by watershed-scale development, as demonstrated by an ordination analysis followed by regression. Because functional community structure affects energy flow and ecosystem function, and functional diversity is known to have important implications for ecosystem resilience to further environmental change, these results highlight the necessity of finding ways to remediate or at least ameliorate these effects.
OI Kovalenko, Katya/0000-0001-7363-212X
TC 8
Z9 8
SN 1932-6203
PD JUL 9
PY 2014
VL 9
IS 7
AR e101499
DI 10.1371/journal.pone.0101499
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000339040600040
PM 25006811
ER

PT J
AU Chiu, CH
   Chao, A
AF Chiu, Chun-Huo
   Chao, Anne
TI Distance-Based Functional Diversity Measures and Their Decomposition: A
   Framework Based on Hill Numbers
SO PLOS ONE
DT Article
ID RAOS QUADRATIC ENTROPY; PHYLOGENETIC DIVERSITY; PARTITIONING DIVERSITY;
   ECOSYSTEM PROCESSES; SPECIES-DIVERSITY; BETA COMPONENTS; MULTIPLE
   TRAITS; COASTAL DUNES; BIODIVERSITY; COMMUNITIES
AB Hill numbers (or the "effective number of species'') are increasingly used to characterize species diversity of an assemblage. This work extends Hill numbers to incorporate species pairwise functional distances calculated from species traits. We derive a parametric class of functional Hill numbers, which quantify "the effective number of equally abundant and (functionally) equally distinct species'' in an assemblage. We also propose a class of mean functional diversity (per species), which quantifies the effective sum of functional distances between a fixed species to all other species. The product of the functional Hill number and the mean functional diversity thus quantifies the (total) functional diversity, i.e., the effective total distance between species of the assemblage. The three measures (functional Hill numbers, mean functional diversity and total functional diversity) quantify different aspects of species trait space, and all are based on species abundance and species pairwise functional distances. When all species are equally distinct, our functional Hill numbers reduce to ordinary Hill numbers. When species abundances are not considered or species are equally abundant, our total functional diversity reduces to the sum of all pairwise distances between species of an assemblage. The functional Hill numbers and the mean functional diversity both satisfy a replication principle, implying the total functional diversity satisfies a quadratic replication principle. When there are multiple assemblages defined by the investigator, each of the three measures of the pooled assemblage (gamma) can be multiplicatively decomposed into alpha and beta components, and the two components are independent. The resulting beta component measures pure functional differentiation among assemblages and can be further transformed to obtain several classes of normalized functional similarity (or differentiation) measures, including N-assemblage functional generalizations of the classic Jaccard, Sorensen, Horn and Morisita-Horn similarity indices. The proposed measures are applied to artificial and real data for illustration.
OI CHIU, CHUN-HUO/0000-0002-7096-2278
TC 36
Z9 36
SN 1932-6203
PD JUL 7
PY 2014
VL 9
IS 7
AR e100014
DI 10.1371/journal.pone.0100014
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000338637300006
PM 25000299
ER

PT J
AU Sagerman, J
   Enge, S
   Pavia, H
   Wikstrom, SA
AF Sagerman, Josefin
   Enge, Swantje
   Pavia, Henrik
   Wikstrom, Sofia A.
TI Divergent ecological strategies determine different impacts on community
   production by two successful non-native seaweeds
SO OECOLOGIA
DT Article
DE Plant invasion; Primary production; Ecosystem function; Heterosiphonia
   japonica; Bonnemaisonia hamifera
ID EXOTIC PLANT INVASIONS; INCREASED COMPETITIVE ABILITY; KELP
   SACCHARINA-LATISSIMA; INTRODUCED RED ALGA; BIOLOGICAL INVASIONS;
   BONNEMAISONIA-HAMIFERA; CAULERPA-TAXIFOLIA; SPECIES IDENTITY; CHEMICAL
   WEAPON; RHODOPHYTA
AB The consequences of plant introductions into ecosystems are frequently reported from terrestrial environments, but little is known about the effects on ecosystem functioning caused by non-native primary producers in marine systems. In this study we explored the effects of the invasion by the two filamentous red algae Heterosiphonia japonica and Bonnemaisonia hamifera on the primary production of seaweed communities by using single and mixed cultures of non-native and native red algae. The experiments were conducted both in the presence and absence of herbivores. Biomass production of the invaded community increased more than four times in mixed cultures with H. japonica, while introduction by B. hamifera had no significant effect. The different impact on community production could be explained by differences in life history strategies between the invaders; H. japonica grew considerably faster than the native seaweeds which directly increased the community production, while B. hamifera showed a relatively slow growth rate and therefore had no effect. From previous studies it is known that B. hamifera produces a highly deterrent, but also costly, chemical defence. The assessment of survival and growth of a native generalist herbivore further corroborated that the biomass produced by B. hamifera constitutes a very low-quality food, whereas the performance of herbivores on a diet of H. japonica was comparable to that on native algal diets. In summary, this study demonstrates that successful invaders belonging to the same functional group (filamentous red algae) may have distinctly different impacts on productivity in the recipient community, depending on their specific life history traits.
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 0029-8549
EI 1432-1939
PD JUL
PY 2014
VL 175
IS 3
BP 937
EP 946
DI 10.1007/s00442-014-2938-2
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000338202600017
PM 24728943
ER

PT J
AU Miguel-Chinchilla, L
   Boix, D
   Gascon, S
   Comin, FA
AF Miguel-Chinchilla, Leticia
   Boix, Dani
   Gascon, Stephanie
   Comin, Francisco A.
TI Taxonomic and functional successional patterns in macroinvertebrates
   related to flying dispersal abilities: a case study from isolated
   manmade ponds at reclaimed opencast coal mines
SO HYDROBIOLOGIA
DT Article
DE Primary succession; Macroinvertebrates; Fly; Dispersal; Biological
   traits; Taxonomic composition; Deterministic forces; Stochasticity
ID MEDITERRANEAN-CLIMATE STREAMS; COMMUNITY STRUCTURE; INVERTEBRATE
   COMMUNITIES; SPECIES TRAITS; BODY-SIZE; AQUATIC INVERTEBRATES;
   MULTIVARIATE ANALYSES; BIOLOGICAL TRAITS; HABITAT TEMPLET; TEMPORARY
   POND
AB It has been proposed that communities change from r to K strategies during primary succession. However, because strong-flying organisms are expected to arrive first in newly created habitats and they show trait characteristics associated more often with K strategies, we hypothesized that the r to K trajectories would be more closely followed by flightless and poorly-flying organisms. Moreover, we expected that macroinvertebrate communities would converge in their functional composition due to deterministic forces while diverging as taxonomic assemblages due to stochastic drift and biotic interactions. However, we also expected that dispersal abilities of the organisms would affect these tendencies. To address these issues, macroinvertebrates were sampled from isolated manmade ponds of different ages (1-22 years old) constructed at reclaimed opencast coal mines. In accordance with our expectations, only flightless and poorly-flying organisms exhibited a slight shift from r to K strategies, the community taxonomically diverged along the primary succession gradient, and stochastic drift showed greater effects on strong-flying organisms. In contrast, the community did not converge in its functional composition. The weak differences observed among the macroinvertebrates from ponds of different ages suggested that limiting environmental conditions prevented the organisms from evolving to a more structured community.
RI Gascon, Stephanie/L-7471-2014; Boix, Dani/L-5190-2014
OI Gascon, Stephanie/0000-0003-1951-9083; Boix, Dani/0000-0001-5468-2236
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 0018-8158
EI 1573-5117
PD JUL
PY 2014
VL 732
IS 1
BP 111
EP 122
DI 10.1007/s10750-014-1851-3
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000335701500009
ER

PT J
AU Fischer, FM
   Oliveira, JM
   Dresseno, ALP
   Pillar, VD
AF Fischer, Felicia M.
   Oliveira, Juliano M.
   Dresseno, Andre L. P.
   Pillar, Valerio D.
TI The role of invasive pine on changes of plant composition and functional
   traits in a coastal dune ecosystem
SO NATUREZA & CONSERVACAO
DT Article
DE Pinus taeda; Non-graminoid species; Psammophilous vegetation; Ecological
   succession; Functional diversity
ID SUCCESSION; COMMUNITY
AB In this article we investigate how invasion by Pinus taeda L. alters plant community composition and functional traits in sand dunes. In invaded psammophilous vegetation in southern Brazil, we randomly selected 15 P. taeda individuals and measured their age based on the number of growth rings. For each tree, we sampled 1 m(2) quadrats beneath and 2 m away of its crown. In each quadrat, we assessed non-graminoid plant composition and performed a multivariate analysis of variance. Data on species' functional traits were scaled up to community level, and their variations were compared to tree age by linear regression. Species' composition and functional traits under P. taeda crown were different from control plots. Tree age affected the presence of thorns, potential height, and functional diversity. P. taeda individuals likely change the micro-habitat beneath their crowns, thereby benefiting species with some traits and increasing functional diversity of plants that are not characteristic of open dune communities. (C) 2014 Associacao Brasileira de Ciencia Ecologica e Conservacao. Published by Elsevier Editora Ltda.
RI Pillar, Valerio/B-9872-2008
OI Pillar, Valerio/0000-0001-6408-2891; Morales Oliveira,
   Juliano/0000-0003-2834-852X
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 1679-0073
EI 2178-3675
PD JUN
PY 2014
VL 12
IS 1
BP 19
EP 23
DI 10.4322/natcon.2014.004
SC Biodiversity & Conservation
UT WOS:000344906800004
ER

PT J
AU Hill, JM
   Weissburg, MJ
AF Hill, Jennifer M.
   Weissburg, Marc J.
TI Crabs interpret the threat of predator body size and biomass via cue
   concentration and diet
SO ANIMAL BEHAVIOUR
DT Article
DE antipredator behaviour; blue crab; mud crab; nonconsumptive effect;
   trait-mediated interaction
ID CALLINECTES-SAPIDUS; PREY INTERACTIONS; ALARM CUES;
   CRASSOSTREA-VIRGINICA; FUNCTIONAL-RESPONSES; PANOPEUS-HERBSTII; JUVENILE
   OYSTERS; BLUE CRABS; SALT-MARSH; BEHAVIOR
AB Greater predator body size is often associated with greater predation risk. According to the threat-sensitive predator avoidance hypothesis, prey should display graded responses to increasing predator body size; in turn, these differences in behaviour should also cause differing indirect effects. Yet, in aquatic systems, where prey often use chemical cues to judge predator threats, the role of chemically mediated perception of predator body size and the propagation of indirect effects are still unclear. To differentiate intraspecific predator size via chemical cues, prey must judge predator threat quantitatively (i.e. via concentration) or qualitatively (i.e. via differing cues and/or diets). We investigated the role of individual and aggregate predator body size (i.e. biomass, cue concentration) and qualitative diet cues in antipredator behaviour and indirect interactions by examining the behavioural responses of the mud crab Panopeus herbstii and the survival of oyster prey (Crassostrea virginica) in response to various blue crab, Callinectes sapidus, biomass and diet treatments. Mud crabs increased their refuge use and decreased foraging in response to chemical cues from large, but not small, individual blue crabs. The perception of predator size appeared to be related to predator biomass as multiple small blue crabs and large crabs elicited similar foraging responses in mud crabs. However, multiple small blue crabs failed to affect mud crab refuge use, indicating that some measures of behaviour may not always be predictive of indirect effects. Predator diet also influenced mud crab behaviour and foraging: predators fed mud crabs elicited a greater antipredator response than crushed conspecifics or predators fed oyster diets, suggesting that qualitative cues also influence intraspecific threat perception and indirect interactions. These experiments demonstrate that we cannot successfully predict indirect interactions without considering predator population size structure and measuring indirect effects. (C) 2014 The Association for the Study of Animal Behaviour. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
TC 9
Z9 9
SN 0003-3472
EI 1095-8282
PD JUN
PY 2014
VL 92
BP 117
EP 123
DI 10.1016/j.anbehav.2014.03.025
SC Behavioral Sciences; Zoology
UT WOS:000338281000016
ER

PT J
AU Henriques, S
   Pais, MP
   Vasconcelos, RP
   Murta, A
   Azevedo, M
   Costa, MJ
   Cabral, HN
AF Henriques, Sofia
   Pais, Miguel P.
   Vasconcelos, Rita P.
   Murta, Alberto
   Azevedo, Manuela
   Costa, Maria J.
   Cabral, Henrique N.
TI Structural and functional trends indicate fishing pressure on marine
   fish assemblages
SO JOURNAL OF APPLIED ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE fishing pressure; fish assemblages; soft-substrate marine habitats;
   response models; guild approach; ecosystem function; structural and
   functional metrics; critical thresholds
ID ECOSYSTEM-BASED MANAGEMENT; LONG-TERM CHANGES; COMMUNITY INDICATORS;
   CONTINENTAL-SHELF; NORTH-SEA; CONSERVATION; FISHERIES; THRESHOLDS;
   PORTUGAL; PATTERNS
AB Conservation science increasingly focuses on how ecosystem functioning is affected by anthropogenic pressures, which implies an understanding of the structural and functional changes in biological assemblages and requires indicators to detect such changes within a suitable time frame. A novel approach that combines the spatial analysis of fishing gradients (based on vessel monitoring system records) with distance-based linear models was used to assess the response of several functional and structural metrics of fish assemblages to gradients of trawling, within four distinct habitat types. In addition, critical thresholds of trawling intensity were identified for the most sensitive metrics through piecewise regression models. Overall, total biomass and dominance (i.e. number of species that make up 90% of the total biomass) metrics as well as metrics representing vulnerable features (such as chondrichthyes, species with very low resilience and sedentary species) were shown to be sensitive to fishing. Our results suggest that decreasing trends in these indicators are likely to be associated with direct and indirect fishing effects acting synergistically on specific features of fish assemblages leading to its homogenization, with likely impacts on ecosystems resilience. Critical thresholds at high, medium and low fishing intensity levels were identified depending on the metric used to assess fishing impacts, suggesting that it is difficult to define a single global target for fishing management as it ultimately will depend on management and conservation objectives (e.g. maintenance of biomass vs. maintenance of structure and function). Synthesis and applications. A key goal of the applied approach was to provide short-term indicators that are sensitive to gradients of trawling intensity and can be extrapolated to a broader geographical region. The identification of thresholds of fishing pressure that fish assemblages can withstand before ecosystem functioning is altered is key for the development of indicators as warning mechanisms, as well as to assess performance measures for management. Understanding responses to other pressure sources (e.g. pollution, dredging) requires further research, and combining an integrative functional traits approach with a wider range of pressures may help make this achievable.
RI Vasconcelos, Rita/F-1236-2011; Cabral, Henrique/D-5201-2011; Pais,
   Miguel/B-1537-2012; Henriques, Sofia/B-1690-2012
OI Vasconcelos, Rita/0000-0002-1113-4915; Cabral,
   Henrique/0000-0002-7646-6208; Pais, Miguel/0000-0003-4282-9995;
   Henriques, Sofia/0000-0002-0165-2997; Costa, Maria
   Jose/0000-0002-9089-7266
TC 12
Z9 12
SN 0021-8901
EI 1365-2664
PD JUN
PY 2014
VL 51
IS 3
BP 623
EP 631
DI 10.1111/1365-2664.12235
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000335962200008
ER

PT J
AU Shiflett, SA
   Zinnert, JC
   Young, DR
AF Shiflett, Sheri A.
   Zinnert, Julie C.
   Young, Donald R.
TI Conservation of functional traits leads to shrub expansion across a
   chronosequence of shrub thicket development
SO TREES-STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION
DT Article
DE Chronosequence; Chlorophyll fluorescence; ETR; Hydraulic conductivity;
   Shrub expansion
ID VIRGINIA BARRIER ISLANDS; MYRICA-CERIFERA; WATER-STRESS; CHLOROPHYLL
   FLUORESCENCE; PHYSIOLOGICAL-RESPONSES; HYDRAULIC CONDUCTIVITY; STOMATAL
   DENSITY; DROUGHT STRESS; FRESH-WATER; VEGETATION
AB Robust physiology of Myrica cerifera across a chronosequence (i.e., space for time substitution) of shrub thicket age classes contributes to rapid cover expansion observed in the last 50 years.
   Many studies have documented the causes of woody expansion into grasslands, but few address unique morphological and physiological traits that facilitate expansion. Myrica cerifera, an evergreen N-fixer, is the dominant shrub on many barrier islands of the southeastern United States. Cover of Myrica cerifera has expanded by similar to 400 % on Hog Island, Virginia, in the past 50 years. Accretion of the northern end of the island has resulted in a chronosequence (i.e., space for time substitution) of both soil age and shrub thicket development. We investigated functional traits and physiological parameters related to light capture, processing and water balance of M. cerifera across shrub thickets of four age classes from similar to 10 to similar to 50 years. We hypothesized that light processing capabilities and hydraulic capacity would be reduced with thicket age. Spatial variation in morphology (i.e., leaf thickness, leaf area) and structure (i.e., leaf angle) related to light capture was observed. Yet, little or no differences were detected in stomatal density, photosynthetic pigments, electron transport rate (ETR) and hydraulic conductivity across sites. Previous research has shown declines in leaf N content, productivity and leaf litter production across the chronosequence. In contrast, we observed that physiology remains consistent despite considerable differences in thicket age and development. Myrica cerifera maintains high photosynthetic and hydraulic efficiency, factors which enable expansion and maintenance of shrub thickets in mesic coastal environments.
RI Young, Kristina/M-3069-2014
TC 4
Z9 5
SN 0931-1890
EI 1432-2285
PD JUN
PY 2014
VL 28
IS 3
BP 849
EP 858
DI 10.1007/s00468-014-0997-y
SC Forestry
UT WOS:000336270400018
ER

PT J
AU Malkowsky, Y
   Gotze, MC
AF Malkowsky, Yaron
   Goetze, Marie-Carolin
TI Impact of habitat and life trait on character evolution of pallial eyes
   in Pectinidae (Mollusca: bivalvia)
SO ORGANISMS DIVERSITY & EVOLUTION
DT Article
DE Evolution; Invertebrate eyes; Pectinidae; Scallop
ID CONCAVE MIRROR EYES; FUNCTIONAL-MORPHOLOGY; PECTINOIDEA MOLLUSCA;
   SCALLOPS; PECTEN; PHYLOGENIES; SPONDYLUS; ICELAND; CORNEA; LENS
AB Pectinidae, a large group of marine bivalves comprising more than 300 species worldwide, inhabit a diverse array of habitats, enabling an enormous radiation, and yielding many different life forms and adaptations. This apparent diversity led to the distinction of ecotypes based on shell morphology and lifestyle. Eyes in Pectinidae (Bivalvia, Pteriomorphia) have long sparked scientific interest and have been described for various species over the past two centuries. These eyes are morphologically and functionally highly complex. Despite this complexity, studies have focused mostly on functional aspects with only few examining the relationships associated with different environmental or evolutionary traits. Here, the pallial eye structure within the Pectinidae was examined using Masson Goldner Trichrom staining, and ancestral character estimation with BayesTraits was performed to reconstruct macro-evolutionary patterns. To evaluate the connection of substrate type and lifestyle to the evolution of eyes, we compared eyes within the major subgroups of Pectinidae while considering the different lifestyles and substrate types as well as different depth ranges. The results indicate a tendency towards a taxon-/clade-specific evolution in respect to characters such as the cornea and lens while depth specific adaptations occur mainly in the light sensitive compartments of the retina. Successive reduction of eyes seems to occur from shallow to deep water species and ends in a total reduction of all structures in deep sea species.
TC 7
Z9 7
SN 1439-6092
EI 1618-1077
PD JUN
PY 2014
VL 14
IS 2
BP 173
EP 185
DI 10.1007/s13127-013-0165-z
SC Evolutionary Biology; Zoology
UT WOS:000336080900003
ER

PT J
AU Bolam, SG
AF Bolam, S. G.
TI Macrofaunal recovery following the intertidal recharge of dredged
   material: A comparison of structural and functional approaches
SO MARINE ENVIRONMENTAL RESEARCH
DT Article
DE Sediment recharge; Macrofauna; Function; Traits; Structure; Intertidal
ID BENTHIC INVERTEBRATE COMMUNITIES; BIOLOGICAL TRAIT APPROACH; BENEFICIAL
   USE SCHEMES; SECONDARY PRODUCTION; ECOSYSTEM PROCESSES; ANALYSIS BTA;
   LONG-TERM; NORTH-SEA; DIVERSITY; RECOLONIZATION
AB There is a growing need to understand the functional implications of anthropogenic pressures, such as those following coastal disposal of dredged material. Current assessments, based on taxonomic structure of benthic organisms, only provide a limited capacity to determine functional impacts or recovery. This study assesses recovery of two intertidal dredged material recharge schemes, comparing results obtained based on taxonomic structure (univariate and multivariate approaches) and function (biological trait composition, functional diversity, secondary production) of the benthic assemblages.
   The assemblages recolonising both schemes were consistently less speciose, less densely-populated and exhibited multivariate community structures that differed from those of the reference areas. However, for both schemes metrics of functionality converged to those of reference areas, although some differences in trait composition persisted for up to 3 years.
   These data support the proposition that impacts of, and recovery from, anthropogenic disturbance should be assessed using a combination of both functional and taxonomic structural approaches. Crown Copyright (C) 2014 Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
TC 8
Z9 9
SN 0141-1136
EI 1879-0291
PD JUN
PY 2014
VL 97
BP 15
EP 29
DI 10.1016/j.marenvres.2014.01.008
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology;
   Toxicology
UT WOS:000335280300003
PM 24534437
ER

PT J
AU Klecka, J
AF Klecka, Jan
TI The role of a water bug, Sigara striata, in freshwater food webs
SO PEERJ
DT Article
DE Predation; Predator-prey interactions; Food webs; Foraging; Heteroptera;
   Corixidae
ID ANIMAL MUTUALISTIC NETWORKS; POLYMERASE-CHAIN-REACTION; BODY-SIZE;
   TROPHIC INTERACTIONS; LITTORAL INSECTS; FISH PREDATION; HABITAT LOSS;
   PREY; COMPLEXITY; STABILITY
AB Freshwater food webs are dominated by aquatic invertebrates whose trophic relationships are often poorly known. Here, I used laboratory experiments to study the role of a water bug, Sigara striata, as a potential predator and prey in food webs of stagnant waters. Multiple-choice predation experiment revealed that Sigara, which had been considered mostly herbivorous, also consumed larvae of Chironomus midges. Because they often occur in high densities and are among the most ubiquitous aquatic insects, Sigara water bugs may be important predators in fresh waters. A second experiment tested the role of Sigara as a potential prey for 13 common invertebrate predators. Mortality of Sigara inflicted by different predators varied widely, especially depending on body mass, foraging mode (ambush/searching) and feeding mode (chewing/suctorial) of the predators. Sigara was highly vulnerable to ambush predators, while searching predators caused on average 8.1 times lower mortality of Sigara. Additionally, suctorial predators consumed on average 6.6 times more Sigara individuals than chewing predators, which supports previous results hinting on potentially different predation pressures of these two types of predators on prey populations. The importance of these two foraging-related traits demonstrates the need to move from body mass based to multiple trait based descriptions of food web structure. Overall, the results suggests that detailed experimental studies of common but insufficiently known species can significantly enhance our understanding of food web structure.
RI Klecka, Jan/H-7874-2014
OI Klecka, Jan/0000-0003-0633-3896
TC 5
Z9 5
SN 2167-8359
PD MAY 22
PY 2014
VL 2
AR e389
DI 10.7717/peerj.389
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000347608100004
PM 24883250
ER

PT J
AU D'Argenio, V
   Notomista, E
   Petrillo, M
   Cantiello, P
   Cafaro, V
   Izzo, V
   Naso, B
   Cozzuto, L
   Durante, L
   Troncone, L
   Paolella, G
   Salvatore, F
   Di Donato, A
AF D'Argenio, Valeria
   Notomista, Eugenio
   Petrillo, Mauro
   Cantiello, Piergiuseppe
   Cafaro, Valeria
   Izzo, Viviana
   Naso, Barbara
   Cozzuto, Luca
   Durante, Lorenzo
   Troncone, Luca
   Paolella, Giovanni
   Salvatore, Francesco
   Di Donato, Alberto
TI Complete sequencing of Novosphingobium sp PP1Y reveals a
   biotechnologically meaningful metabolic pattern
SO BMC GENOMICS
DT Article
DE De novo sequencing; Novosphingobium sp PP1Y; Sphingomonads; Next
   generation sequencing; Aromatic pollutant compounds/bioremediation
ID HEXACHLOROCYCLOHEXANE-DEGRADING BACTERIUM; SPHINGOMONAS-WITTICHII RW1;
   SPHINGOBIUM-JAPONICUM UT26; PSEUDOMONAS-STUTZERI OX1; ESCHERICHIA-COLI;
   GENOME SEQUENCE; AROMATIC-COMPOUNDS; WHOLE GENOME; DEGRADATION;
   BIODEGRADATION
AB Background: Novosphingobium sp. strain PP1Y is a marine a-proteobacterium adapted to grow at the water/fuel oil interface. It exploits the aromatic fraction of fuel oils as a carbon and energy source. PP1Y is able to grow on a wide range of mono-, poly- and heterocyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. Here, we report the complete functional annotation of the whole Novosphingobium genome.
   Results: PP1Y genome analysis and its comparison with other Sphingomonadal genomes has yielded novel insights into the molecular basis of PP1Y's phenotypic traits, such as its peculiar ability to encapsulate and degrade the aromatic fraction of fuel oils. In particular, we have identified and dissected several highly specialized metabolic pathways involved in: (i) aromatic hydrocarbon degradation; (ii) resistance to toxic compounds; and (iii) the quorum sensing mechanism.
   Conclusions: In summary, the unraveling of the entire PP1Y genome sequence has provided important insight into PP1Y metabolism and, most importantly, has opened new perspectives about the possibility of its manipulation for bioremediation purposes.
RI Cozzuto, Luca/K-5385-2015; Troncone, Luca/M-5698-2017; Izzo,
   Viviana/Q-2076-2015; D'Argenio, Valeria/K-9345-2016
OI Cozzuto, Luca/0000-0003-3194-8892; Troncone, Luca/0000-0002-2056-8758;
   Izzo, Viviana/0000-0001-6066-7569; D'Argenio,
   Valeria/0000-0001-9273-3698; Petrillo, Mauro/0000-0002-6782-4704;
   Salvatore, Francesco/0000-0002-2346-3564; DI DONATO,
   Alberto/0000-0001-9129-9850; NOTOMISTA, Eugenio/0000-0003-0097-6487
TC 19
Z9 19
SN 1471-2164
PD MAY 19
PY 2014
VL 15
AR 384
DI 10.1186/1471-2164-15-384
SC Biotechnology & Applied Microbiology; Genetics & Heredity
UT WOS:000338678100001
PM 24884518
ER

PT J
AU Handa, IT
   Aerts, R
   Berendse, F
   Berg, MP
   Bruder, A
   Butenschoen, O
   Chauvet, E
   Gessner, MO
   Jabiol, J
   Makkonen, M
   McKie, BG
   Malmqvist, B
   Peeters, ETHM
   Scheu, S
   Schmid, B
   van Ruijven, J
   Vos, VCA
   Hattenschwiler, S
AF Handa, I. Tanya
   Aerts, Rien
   Berendse, Frank
   Berg, Matty P.
   Bruder, Andreas
   Butenschoen, Olaf
   Chauvet, Eric
   Gessner, Mark O.
   Jabiol, Jeremy
   Makkonen, Marika
   McKie, Brendan G.
   Malmqvist, Bjoern
   Peeters, Edwin T. H. M.
   Scheu, Stefan
   Schmid, Bernhard
   van Ruijven, Jasper
   Vos, Veronique C. A.
   Haettenschwiler, Stephan
TI Consequences of biodiversity loss for litter decomposition across biomes
SO NATURE
DT Article
ID SPECIES FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; LEAF-LITTER; ECOSYSTEMS; PATTERNS;
   SERVICES; CLIMATE; TRAITS
AB The decomposition of dead organic matter is a major determinant of carbon and nutrient cycling in ecosystems, and of carbon fluxes between the biosphere and the atmosphere(1-3). Decomposition is driven by a vast diversity of organisms that are structured in complex food webs(2,4). Identifying the mechanisms underlying the effects of biodiversity on decomposition is critical(4-6) given the rapid loss of species worldwide and the effects of this loss on human well-being(7-9). Yet despite comprehensive syntheses of studies on how biodiversity affects litter decomposition(4-6,10), key questions remain, including when, where and how biodiversity has a role and whether general patterns and mechanisms occur across ecosystems and different functional types of organism(4,9-12). Here, in field experiments across five terrestrial and aquatic locations, ranging from the subarctic to the tropics, we show that reducing the functional diversity of decomposer organisms and plant litter types slowed the cycling of litter carbon and nitrogen. Moreover, we found evidence of nitrogen transfer from the litter of nitrogen-fixing plants to that of rapidly decomposing plants, but not between other plant functional types, highlighting that specific interactions in litter mixtures control carbon and nitrogen cycling during decomposition. The emergence of this general mechanism and the coherence of patterns across contrasting terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems suggest that biodiversity loss has consistent consequences for litter decomposition and the cycling of major elements on broad spatial scales.
RI Schmid, Bernhard/C-8625-2009; Chauvet, Eric/F-7644-2011
OI Schmid, Bernhard/0000-0002-8430-3214; Chauvet, Eric/0000-0001-8676-392X;
   Peeters, Edwin T.H.M./0000-0003-2541-1829; Berg, Matty
   P./0000-0001-8442-8503; McKie, Brendan/0000-0002-1796-9497
TC 184
Z9 196
SN 0028-0836
EI 1476-4687
PD MAY 8
PY 2014
VL 509
IS 7499
BP 218
EP +
DI 10.1038/nature13247
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000335454300037
PM 24805346
ER

PT J
AU Comeau, S
   Edmunds, PJ
   Spindel, NB
   Carpenter, RC
AF Comeau, S.
   Edmunds, P. J.
   Spindel, N. B.
   Carpenter, R. C.
TI Fast coral reef calcifiers are more sensitive to ocean acidification in
   short-term laboratory incubations
SO LIMNOLOGY AND OCEANOGRAPHY
DT Article
ID SCLERACTINIAN CORALS; CARBON-DIOXIDE; CLIMATE-CHANGE; CO2;
   CALCIFICATION; ALGAE; METAANALYSIS; ORGANISMS; TEMPERATE; RESPONSES
AB To identify the properties of taxa sensitive and resistant to ocean acidification (OA), we tested the hypothesis that coral reef calcifiers differ in their sensitivity to OA as predictable outcomes of functional group alliances determined by conspicuous traits. We contrasted functional groups of eight corals and eight calcifying algae defined by morphology in corals and algae, skeletal structure in corals, spatial location of calcification in algae, and growth rate in corals and algae. The responses of calcification to OA were unrelated to morphology and skeletal structure in corals; they were, however, affected by growth rate in corals and algae (fast calcifiers were more sensitive than slow calcifiers), and by the site of calcification and morphology in algae. Species assemblages characterized by fast growth, and for algae, also cell-wall calcification, are likely to be ecological losers in the future ocean. This shift in relative success will affect the relative and absolute species abundances as well as the goods and services provided by coral reefs.
TC 49
Z9 51
SN 0024-3590
EI 1939-5590
PD MAY
PY 2014
VL 59
IS 3
BP 1081
EP 1091
DI 10.4319/lo.2014.59.3.1081
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000339904300034
ER

PT J
AU Rinaldi, A
   Montalto, V
   Manganaro, A
   Mazzola, A
   Mirto, S
   Sanfilippo, M
   Sara, G
AF Rinaldi, A.
   Montalto, V.
   Manganaro, A.
   Mazzola, A.
   Mirto, S.
   Sanfilippo, M.
   Sara, G.
TI Predictive mechanistic bioenergetics to model habitat suitability of
   shellfish culture in coastal lakes
SO ESTUARINE COASTAL AND SHELF SCIENCE
DT Article
DE aquaculture; Dynamic Energy Budget model; habitat suitability; life
   history traits; Mytilus galloprovincialis; organismal fitness; lagoon
ID DYNAMIC ENERGY BUDGET; MUSSEL MYTILUS-EDULIS; BIVALVE
   SUSPENSION-FEEDERS; FOOD AVAILABILITY; DEB MODELS; FUNCTIONAL TRAITS;
   ECOLOGICAL NICHE; ORGANIC-MATTER; LIFE-HISTORY; GROWTH
AB Quantitative tools based on mechanistic modelling of functional traits able to enhance the sustainability of aquaculture and most other human activities (i.e. reducing the likelihood of detrimental impacts optimising productions), are especially important factors in the decision to site aquaculture facilities in coastal lakes, ponds and lagoons and, in the case of detrimental impact, to adopt mitigation measures. We tested the ability of mechanistic functional trait based models to predict life history traits of cultivable shellfish in shallow coastal lakes. Dynamic Energy Budget (DEB) models were run to generate spatially explicit predictions of Mytilus galloprovincialis life history (LH) traits (e.g. body size and fecundity). Using fortnightly data of food supply and hourly data of body temperatures, and exploiting the power of mechanistic rules, we estimated the amount of faeces ejected by a fixed quantity of organisms cultivated in two shallow Southern Mediterranean (Sicily) lakes. These differed in terms of temperature and food density, implying large differences in life history traits of mussels in the two study areas. This information could help facilitate the selection of sites where environmental conditions are more suitable for aquaculture and contextually compatible with sustainability. The validation exercise obtained by comparing the predicted and observed data was nearly consistent. Therefore, a mechanistic functional traits-based model seems able to capture the link between habitat characteristics and functional traits of organisms, delineating the fundamental portion of an ecological niche, the possibility of predicting LH traits and potential ecological applications in the management of natural coastal resources. (C) 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
RI Mirto, Simone/B-7474-2016; Sanfilippo, Marilena/C-9710-2016
OI Mirto, Simone/0000-0003-4707-7307; Sanfilippo,
   Marilena/0000-0003-2327-5827; SARA', Gianluca/0000-0002-7658-5274
TC 7
Z9 8
SN 0272-7714
EI 1096-0015
PD MAY 1
PY 2014
VL 144
BP 89
EP 98
DI 10.1016/j.ecss.2014.04.013
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000337881400011
ER

PT J
AU Bates, AE
   Pecl, GT
   Frusher, S
   Hobday, AJ
   Wernberg, T
   Smale, DA
   Sunday, JM
   Hill, NA
   Dulvy, NK
   Colwell, RK
   Holbrook, NJ
   Fulton, EA
   Slawinski, D
   Feng, M
   Edgar, GJ
   Radford, BT
   Thompson, PA
   Watson, RA
AF Bates, Amanda E.
   Pecl, Gretta T.
   Frusher, Stewart
   Hobday, Alistair J.
   Wernberg, Thomas
   Smale, Dan A.
   Sunday, Jennifer M.
   Hill, Nicole A.
   Dulvy, Nicholas K.
   Colwell, Robert K.
   Holbrook, Neil J.
   Fulton, Elizabeth A.
   Slawinski, Dirk
   Feng, Ming
   Edgar, Graham J.
   Radford, Ben T.
   Thompson, Peter A.
   Watson, Reg A.
TI Defining and observing stages of climate-mediated range shifts in marine
   systems
SO GLOBAL ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE-HUMAN AND POLICY DIMENSIONS
DT Article
DE Species redistribution; Attribution; Prediction; Biogeography; Warming;
   Abundance-occupancy relationship
ID CHANGE IMPACTS; DISTRIBUTIONAL SHIFTS; INTERTIDAL ORGANISMS; DESIGNING
   OCCUPANCY; OCEAN TEMPERATURE; CHANGING CLIMATE; FISHERIES CATCH;
   MACOMA-BALTHICA; ENGLISH-CHANNEL; HISTORICAL DATA
AB Climate change is transforming the structure of biological communities through the geographic extension and contraction of species' ranges. Range edges are naturally dynamic, and shifts in the location of range edges occur at different rates and are driven by different mechanisms. This leads to challenges when seeking to generalize responses among taxa and across systems. We focus on warming-related range shifts in marine systems to describe extensions and contractions as stages. Range extensions occur as a sequence of (1) arrival, (2) population increase, and (3) persistence. By contrast, range contractions occur progressively as (1) performance decline, (2) population decrease and (3) local extinction. This stage-based framework can be broadly applied to geographic shifts in any species, life-history stage, or population subset. Ideally the probability of transitioning through progressive range shift stages could be estimated from empirical understanding of the various factors influencing range shift rates. Nevertheless, abundance and occupancy data at the spatial resolution required to quantify range shifts are often unavailable and we suggest the pragmatic solution of considering observations of range shifts within a confidence framework incorporating the type, amount and quality of data. We use case studies to illustrate how diverse evidence sources can be used to stage range extensions and contractions and assign confidence that an observed range shift stage has been reached. We then evaluate the utility of trait-based risk (invasion) and vulnerability (extinction) frameworks for application in a range shift context and find inadequacies, indicating an important area for development. We further consider factors that influence rates of extension and contraction of range edges in marine habitats. Finally, we suggest approaches required to increase our capacity to observe and predict geographic range shifts under climate change. (C) 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
RI Pecl, Gretta/D-7267-2011; Thompson, Peter/A-2361-2012; Colwell,
   Robert/C-7276-2015; Wernberg, Thomas/B-4172-2010; Feng,
   Ming/F-5411-2010; Hobday, Alistair/A-1460-2012; Fulton,
   Elizabeth/A-2871-2008; Holbrook, Neil/M-7544-2013; Hill,
   Nicole/J-7856-2014; Edgar, Graham/C-8341-2013
OI Pecl, Gretta/0000-0003-0192-4339; Thompson, Peter/0000-0002-9504-5433;
   Wernberg, Thomas/0000-0003-1185-9745; Feng, Ming/0000-0002-2855-7092;
   Hobday, Alistair/0000-0002-3194-8326; Fulton,
   Elizabeth/0000-0002-5904-7917; Holbrook, Neil/0000-0002-3523-6254; Hill,
   Nicole/0000-0001-9329-6717; Edgar, Graham/0000-0003-0833-9001; Watson,
   Reg/0000-0001-7201-8865; Bates, Amanda/0000-0002-0198-4537; Smale,
   Dan/0000-0003-4157-541X; Dulvy, Nicholas/0000-0002-4295-9725; Frusher,
   Stewart/0000-0003-2493-3676
TC 79
Z9 80
SN 0959-3780
EI 1872-9495
PD MAY
PY 2014
VL 26
BP 27
EP 38
DI 10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2014.03.009
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Geography
UT WOS:000337858600004
ER

PT J
AU Kaewsrikhaw, R
   Prathep, A
AF Kaewsrikhaw, Ratchanee
   Prathep, Anchana
TI The effect of habitats, densities and seasons on morphology, anatomy and
   pigment content of the seagrass Halophila ovalis (R.Br.) Hook.f. at Haad
   Chao Mai National Park, Southern Thailand
SO AQUATIC BOTANY
DT Article
DE Halophila ovalis (R.Br.) Hook.f.; Habitat; Morphology; Anatomy; Pigment
ID FUNCTIONAL TRAITS WORLDWIDE; CHLOROPHYLL-A FLUORESCENCE;
   THALASSIA-TESTUDINUM; PHOTOSYNTHETIC RESPONSES; INTERTIDAL SEAGRASSES;
   STRESS; ANTHOCYANIN; HANDBOOK; GROWTH
AB Halophila ovalis is a small marine angiosperm that is widely distributed throughout the world. In this study, the morphology, the anatomy and pigment content of H. ovalis leaves from two habitat types (sand vs. tide pool) on the upper shore, each from high density and ca. 50% of high density locations, which represents the differences in emersion times, were investigated at Haad Chao Mai National Park, Southern Thailand, during the dry (December-April, 2011) and rainy seasons (May-November, 2011). Although the average light intensity and temperature were significantly higher during the dry season, they did not differ between the sand and tide pool habitats. Leaf length, width and area as well as petiole length, were significantly greater in high density beds of the sand habitat. The rhizome intemode length was significantly longer in the tide pool habitat during the rainy season. The size of the air lacunars was significantly smaller during the dry season in the low density sand habitat. The amount of chlorophyll a and total chlorophyll were significantly lower in high density tide pool populations during both seasons. Anthocyanin, as indicated by a high amount of red colour in the leaves, was greatest in the rainy season sand habitat. This study is provides information on a range of H. ovalis variations and helps to better understand the H. ovalis response to changes in exposure conditions in the upper intertidal area. (C) 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
TC 8
Z9 8
SN 0304-3770
EI 1879-1522
PD MAY
PY 2014
VL 116
BP 69
EP 75
DI 10.1016/j.aquabot.2014.01.009
SC Plant Sciences; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000336950700010
ER

PT J
AU Smith, SL
   Merico, A
   Wirtz, KW
   Pahlow, M
AF Smith, S. Lan
   Merico, Agostino
   Wirtz, Kai W.
   Pahlow, Markus
TI Leaving misleading legacies behind in plankton ecosystem modelling
SO JOURNAL OF PLANKTON RESEARCH
DT Article
DE plankton; ecosystem model; adaptive; trait; community
ID NUTRIENT-UPTAKE; PHYTOPLANKTON GROWTH; MECHANISTIC ORIGINS; TRADE-OFFS;
   CELL-SIZE; MARINE; OCEAN; COMMUNITIES; DYNAMICS; BIODIVERSITY
AB The value of mechanistic ecosystem modelling has long been appreciated, and in connection with trait-based approaches it has recently stimulated a more process-based understanding of adaptive capacities and trade-offs. Notwithstanding recent advances, even sophisticated state-of-the-art models of plankton ecosystems, some of which include hundreds of idealized species, do not accurately represent the great biodiversity of plankton, or the associated flexible adaptive response of plankton communities. We build on previous reviews to suggest that it may be necessary to discard some common assumptions and try new approaches in order to construct models that can make new and testable predictions about the "adaptive capacity" of plankton ecosystems. Major challenges remain unresolved for modelling interacting communities of producers and consumers. Rather than the common approach of mixing and matching existing model components, each laden with its own legacy assumptions, we suggest that a judicious combination of innovative, mechanistic approaches that combine traits and trade-offs will likely better address such challenges.
RI Smith, S./D-2493-2012; Merico, Agostino/C-1103-2013
OI Smith, S./0000-0002-2338-5893; Merico, Agostino/0000-0001-8095-8056;
   Trainer, Clarivate/0000-0001-9593-4831
TC 17
Z9 17
SN 0142-7873
EI 1464-3774
PD MAY-JUN
PY 2014
VL 36
IS 3
BP 613
EP 620
DI 10.1093/plankt/fbu011
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000336490000002
ER

PT J
AU Fu, H
   Zhong, JY
   Yuan, GX
   Ni, LY
   Xie, P
   Cao, T
AF Fu, Hui
   Zhong, Jiayou
   Yuan, Guixiang
   Ni, Leyi
   Xie, Ping
   Cao, Te
TI Functional traits composition predict macrophytes community productivity
   along a water depth gradient in a freshwater lake
SO ECOLOGY AND EVOLUTION
DT Article
DE Aquatic macrophytes; community productivity; community-weighted means;
   functional diversity; functional trait composition; water depth gradient
ID ECOSYSTEM PROCESSES; BIODIVERSITY LOSS; CURRENT KNOWLEDGE; SPECIES
   RICHNESS; PLANT DIVERSITY; ECOLOGY; COMPLEMENTARITY; SERVICES; EVENNESS;
   IMPACTS
AB Functional trait composition of plant communities has been proposed as a helpful key for understanding the mechanisms of biodiversity effects on ecosystem functioning. In this study, we applied a step-wise modeling procedure to test the relative effects of taxonomic diversity, functional identity, and functional diversity on macrophytes community productivity along water depth gradient. We sampled 42 plots and 1513 individual plants and measured 16 functional traits and abundance of 17 macrophyte species. Results showed that there was a significant decrease in taxonomic diversity, functional identity (i.e., stem dry mass content, leaf [C] and leaf [N]), and functional diversity (i.e., floating leaf, mean Julian flowering date and rooting depth) with increasing water depth. For the multiple-trait functional diversity (FD) indices, functional richness decreased, while functional divergence increased with water depth gradient. Macrophyte community productivity was strongly determined by functional trait composition within community, but not significantly affected by taxonomic diversity. Community-weighted means (CWM) showed a two times higher explanatory power relative to FD indices in determining variations in community productivity. For nine of sixteen traits, CWM and FD showed significant correlations with community productivity, although the strength and direction of those relations depended on selected trait. Furthermore, functional composition in a community affected productivity through either additive or opposite effects of CWM and FD, depending on the particular traits being considered. Our results suggested both mechanisms of mass ratio and niche complementarity can operate simultaneously on variations in community productivity, and considering both CWM and FD would lead to a more profound understanding of traits-productivity relationships.
TC 13
Z9 15
SN 2045-7758
PD MAY
PY 2014
VL 4
IS 9
BP 1516
EP 1523
DI 10.1002/ece3.1022
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000335267000002
PM 24967072
ER

PT J
AU Garbin, ML
   Sanchez-Tapia, A
   Carrijo, TT
   Sansevero, JBB
   Scarano, FR
AF Garbin, Mario L.
   Sanchez-Tapia, Andrea
   Carrijo, Tatiana T.
   Sansevero, Jeronimo B. B.
   Scarano, Fabio R.
TI Functional traits behind the association between climbers and
   subordinate woody species
SO JOURNAL OF VEGETATION SCIENCE
DT Article
DE Co-existence; Community assembly; Facilitation; Positive interactions;
   Plant-plant interactions; Cross-taxa relationships
ID TEMPERATE RAIN-FOREST; CLIMBING PLANTS; SEED SIZE; POSITIVE
   INTERACTIONS; FACILITATION; COMMUNITIES; VEGETATION; DIVERSITY;
   ABUNDANCE; ECOLOGY
AB Question
   Functional differences among climber species may reflect different strategies to cope with the environment created by the set of trees and shrubs used to reach the canopy. Moreover, climber diversity may be promoted and maintained by associations with subordinate woody species. Considering that functional differences among climbers may reflect this relationship, we aimed to identify trait differences among climbers, and the traits related to the association between climbers and woody species.
   Location
   Restinga de Jurubatiba National Park, a tropical sandy coastal plant community in southeast Brazil.
   Methods
   Relative abundances of climbers and shrubs/trees were surveyed, and climber species were described by a set of traits related to dispersal, establishment and persistence. Principal coordinate analysis was used to identify trait differences among climbers. Further, we performed principal components analysis in a community-weighted mean trait values matrix (CWM) and compared the major pattern of variation with the abundance of dominant and subordinate woody species, and with environmental variables.
   Results
   The analyses revealed functional traits behind the association between climbers and subordinate woody species. These species are mostly characterized by the presence of latex and dry fruits, anemochorous dispersal and stem twining climbing strategy. They were associated with the subordinate shrub Erythroxylum subsessile. Tendril climbers were more generalist and were also characterized by zoochoric dispersal and the presence of endosperm.
   Conclusions
   The associative behaviour between climbers and the subordinate shrub E.subsessile is explained by a specific set of traits present in species of the same plant family, Apocynaceae. While stem twiners were positively associated with the specialist nurse E.subsessile, tendril climbers were associated with the dominant nurses. These results offer clues to understand the presence of specialist and generalist groups of climber species in tropical plant communities, as well as community assembly through facilitation driven by subordinate species.
RI Garbin, Mario/C-6414-2013; Carrijo, Tatiana/D-3835-2013; Scarano,
   Fabio/F-6620-2012
OI Garbin, Mario/0000-0003-4137-2102; Scarano, Fabio/0000-0003-3355-9882
TC 6
Z9 7
SN 1100-9233
EI 1654-1103
PD MAY
PY 2014
VL 25
IS 3
BP 715
EP 723
DI 10.1111/jvs.12140
SC Plant Sciences; Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Forestry
UT WOS:000334184300011
ER

PT J
AU Earl, JE
   Castello, PO
   Cohagen, KE
   Semlitsch, RD
AF Earl, Julia E.
   Castello, Paula O.
   Cohagen, Kara E.
   Semlitsch, Raymond D.
TI Effects of subsidy quality on reciprocal subsidies: how leaf litter
   species changes frog biomass export
SO OECOLOGIA
DT Article
DE Leaf litter; Tannins; Allochthonous; Detritus; Amphibian larvae
ID TEMPERATE RAIN-FOREST; TADPOLE PERFORMANCE; LARVAL AMPHIBIANS; INVASIVE
   PLANT; FOOD WEBS; COMMUNITY STRUCTURE; STREAM; PONDS; TERRESTRIAL;
   DYNAMICS
AB Spatial subsidies are resources transferred from one ecosystem to another and which can greatly affect recipient systems. Increased subsidy quantity is known to increase these effects, but subsidy quality is likely also important. We examined the effects of leaf litter quality (varying in nutrient and tannin content) in pond mesocosms on gray treefrog (Hyla versicolor) biomass export, as well as water quality and ecosystem processes. We used litter from three different tree species native to Missouri [white oak (Quercus alba), northern red oak (Quercus rubra), and sugar maple (Acer saccharum)], one non-native tree [white pine (Pinus strobus)], and a common aquatic grass [prairie cordgrass (Spartina pectinata)]. We found that leaf litter species affected almost every variable we measured. Gray treefrog biomass export was greatest in mesocosms with grass litter and lowest with white oak litter. Differences in biomass export were affected by high tannin concentrations (or possibly the correlated variable, dissolved oxygen) via their effects on survival, and by primary production, which altered mean body mass. Effects of litter species could often be traced back to the characteristics of the litter itself: leaf nitrogen, phosphorus, and tannin content, which highlights the importance of plant functional traits in affecting aquatic ecosystems. This work and others stress that changes in forest species composition could greatly influence aquatic systems and aquatic-terrestrial linkages.
OI Earl, Julia/0000-0003-0480-9635; Semlitsch, Raymond/0000-0002-7999-5762
TC 11
Z9 12
SN 0029-8549
EI 1432-1939
PD MAY
PY 2014
VL 175
IS 1
BP 209
EP 218
DI 10.1007/s00442-013-2870-x
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000334691600019
PM 24399483
ER

PT J
AU Hughes, AR
AF Hughes, A. Randall
TI Genotypic diversity and trait variance interact to affect marsh plant
   performance
SO JOURNAL OF ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE aquatic plant ecology; phenotypic plasticity; functional diversity;
   Spartina alterniflora; genotypic diversity; biodiversity-ecosystem
   function
ID GRASS SPARTINA-ALTERNIFLORA; ENGLAND SALT-MARSH; GENETIC DIVERSITY;
   PHENOTYPIC PLASTICITY; SPECIES-DIVERSITY; INTRASPECIFIC VARIABILITY;
   ECOLOGICAL CONSEQUENCES; PHYLOGENETIC DIVERSITY; ARTHROPOD COMMUNITY;
   MICROSATELLITE LOCI
AB Intraspecific diversity can have important effects on population, community and ecosystem processes, yet we have little understanding of the relative importance of genetic- versus trait-based measures of intraspecific diversity.
   I conducted a manipulative field experiment of plant (Spartina alterniflora) genotypic diversity and trait diversity to examine their independent and interactive effects on plant performance and community structure. I focused on variation within and among genotypes in plant stem height, a trait that varies substantially across environmental gradients and can be an important predictor of plant competition intensity.
   Trait and genotypic diversity interactively affected multiple metrics of plant performance. Both stem density and spatial spread increased with genotypic diversity in the low trait diversity combinations, yet there were negligible to weak negative effects in the high trait diversity treatments. Spartina alterniflora percentage cover also varied with genotypic and trait diversity, but not in a clear linear pattern.
   There were no effects of trait or genotypic diversity on associated macrofauna above-ground, yet they interactively affected below-ground measures. Infaunal abundance and sediment oxygen availability mirrored the idiosyncratic response of plant percentage cover.
   Despite the interactive effects of genotypic and trait diversity, high trait diversity consistently increased plant performance in genotypic monoculture.
   Synthesis. The effects of intraspecific plant trait diversity on a range of plant and community responses in this study reinforce the premise that functional differences underlie ecological effects of genetic diversity and suggest that readily measured trait variance may serve as a valuable predictor of plant performance.
OI Hughes, A. Randall/0000-0001-5072-7310
TC 18
Z9 19
SN 0022-0477
EI 1365-2745
PD MAY
PY 2014
VL 102
IS 3
BP 651
EP 658
DI 10.1111/1365-2745.12244
SC Plant Sciences; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000334588300011
ER

PT J
AU Hoverman, JT
   Cothran, RD
   Relyea, RA
AF Hoverman, Jason T.
   Cothran, Rickey D.
   Relyea, Rick A.
TI Generalist versus specialist strategies of plasticity: snail responses
   to predators with different foraging modes
SO FRESHWATER BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE selection; gastropod; functional tradeoff; phylogeny; inducible defence
ID FRESH-WATER SNAIL; CRAYFISH ORCONECTES-RUSTICUS; PHENOTYPIC PLASTICITY;
   TRAIT COMPENSATION; CALCIUM-CONCENTRATION; MULTIPLE PREDATORS; MARINE
   SNAIL; LIFE-HISTORY; SHELL SHAPE; TRADE-OFFS
AB Phenotypic plasticity is a common adaptation to environmental heterogeneity, and theory predicts that the evolution of constitutive versus plastic strategies should depend on the frequency of alternative environments, the magnitude of constraints and the costs of plasticity per se. However, it is unclear how species should evolve when they experience more than two environments that favour divergent phenotypes, particularly when they have absolute constraints on their morphology.
   We examined the plasticity of three freshwater snail species (Helisoma anceps, H.campanulata and H.trivolvis) in response to three environments: (i) no predator; (ii) shell-invading water bugs (Belostoma flumineum) and (iii) shell-crushing crayfish (Orconectes rusticus). We found distinct responses by each snail species to the predator treatments. Helisoma anceps starts with a relatively low, narrow and thick shell that becomes lower and thicker in response to crayfish but is unresponsive to water bugs. In contrast, H.campanulata starts with a relatively high, wide and thin shell that becomes lower and wider in response to water bugs but is unresponsive to crayfish. Helisoma trivolvis starts with a shell of intermediate height and width while the predators induce defences in different directions.
   These results suggest that H.trivolvis has a generalist plastic strategy while H.anceps and H.campanulata have specialised plastic strategies orientated against a single type of predator at the potential cost of being unable to respond to others.
   We then performed predation trials to determine predator preferences using a mixture of the three species. After 2weeks of exposure to crayfish cues, H.anceps had higher survival than both H.trivolvis and H.campanulata with uncaged crayfish. After 2weeks of exposure to water bug cues, both H.trivolvis and H.campanulata had higher survival than H.anceps with uncaged water bugs. When predation trials were conducted after 5weeks of exposure to predator cues, H.trivolvis and H.campanulata reached a size refuge from both predators and this shifted predation pressure to H.anceps.
   Collectively, these results suggest that closely related prey species with different absolute constraints in their morphology had different defences that are either specialised or generalised to alternative environments.
RI Hoverman, Jason/D-1756-2013
OI Hoverman, Jason/0000-0002-4002-2728
TC 9
Z9 9
SN 0046-5070
EI 1365-2427
PD MAY
PY 2014
VL 59
IS 5
BP 1101
EP 1112
DI 10.1111/fwb.12332
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000333698500017
ER

PT J
AU Heymans, JJ
   Coll, M
   Libralato, S
   Morissette, L
   Christensen, V
AF Heymans, Johanna Jacomina
   Coll, Marta
   Libralato, Simone
   Morissette, Lyne
   Christensen, Villy
TI Global Patterns in Ecological Indicators of Marine Food Webs: A
   Modelling Approach
SO PLOS ONE
DT Article
ID NORTHERN BENGUELA ECOSYSTEM; MASS-BALANCE MODEL; NETWORK ANALYSIS;
   FISHERIES MANAGEMENT; COASTAL ECOSYSTEMS; SOUTHERN BENGUELA; VENICE
   LAGOON; ECOPATH; STABILITY; COMMUNITIES
AB Background: Ecological attributes estimated from food web models have the potential to be indicators of good environmental status given their capabilities to describe redundancy, food web changes, and sensitivity to fishing. They can be used as a baseline to show how they might be modified in the future with human impacts such as climate change, acidification, eutrophication, or overfishing.
   Methodology: In this study ecological network analysis indicators of 105 marine food web models were tested for variation with traits such as ecosystem type, latitude, ocean basin, depth, size, time period, and exploitation state, whilst also considering structural properties of the models such as number of linkages, number of living functional groups or total number of functional groups as covariate factors.
   Principal findings: Eight indicators were robust to model construction: relative ascendency; relative overhead; redundancy; total systems throughput (TST); primary production/TST; consumption/TST; export/TST; and total biomass of the community. Large-scale differences were seen in the ecosystems of the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans, with the Western Atlantic being more complex with an increased ability to mitigate impacts, while the Eastern Atlantic showed lower internal complexity. In addition, the Eastern Pacific was less organised than the Eastern Atlantic although both of these systems had increased primary production as eastern boundary current systems. Differences by ecosystem type highlighted coral reefs as having the largest energy flow and total biomass per unit of surface, while lagoons, estuaries, and bays had lower transfer efficiencies and higher recycling. These differences prevailed over time, although some traits changed with fishing intensity. Keystone groups were mainly higher trophic level species with mostly top-down effects, while structural/dominant groups were mainly lower trophic level groups (benthic primary producers such as seagrass and macroalgae, and invertebrates). Keystone groups were prevalent in estuarine or small/shallow systems, and in systems with reduced fishing pressure. Changes to the abundance of key functional groups might have significant implications for the functioning of ecosystems and should be avoided through management.
   Conclusion/significance: Our results provide additional understanding of patterns of structural and functional indicators in different ecosystems. Ecosystem traits such as type, size, depth, and location need to be accounted for when setting reference levels as these affect absolute values of ecological indicators. Therefore, establishing absolute reference values for ecosystem indicators may not be suitable to the ecosystem-based, precautionary approach. Reference levels for ecosystem indicators should be developed for individual ecosystems or ecosystems with the same typologies (similar location, ecosystem type, etc.) and not benchmarked against all other ecosystems.
RI Albo Puigserver, Marta/F-5693-2016; Libralato, Simone/N-5668-2015;
   Heymans, Johanna/H-4848-2012
OI Albo Puigserver, Marta/0000-0002-0477-5984; Libralato,
   Simone/0000-0001-8112-1274; Heymans, Johanna/0000-0002-7290-8988
TC 66
Z9 67
SN 1932-6203
PD APR 24
PY 2014
VL 9
IS 4
AR e95845
DI 10.1371/journal.pone.0095845
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000335505000038
PM 24763610
ER

PT J
AU Montalto, V
   Sara, G
   Ruti, PM
   Dell'Aquila, A
   Helmuth, B
AF Montalto, Valeria
   Sara, Gianluca
   Ruti, Paolo Michele
   Dell'Aquila, Alessandro
   Helmuth, Brian
TI Testing the effects of temporal data resolution on predictions of the
   effects of climate change on bivalves
SO ECOLOGICAL MODELLING
DT Article
DE Regional climate models; Dynamic Energy Budget models; Darwinian
   fitness; Marine intertidal zone; Mediterranean; Mytilus
   galloprovincialis
ID ECOLOGICAL PROCESSES; COMMUNITY ECOLOGY; FUNCTIONAL TRAITS;
   THERMAL-STRESS; GLOBAL CHANGE; MODELS; VARIANCE; COASTAL; ENVIRONMENTS;
   VARIABILITY
AB The spatial-temporal scales on which environmental observations are made can significantly affect our perceptions of ecological patterns in nature. Understanding potential mismatches between environmental data used as inputs to predictive models, and the forecasts of ecological responses that these models generate are particularly difficult when predicting responses to climate change since the assumption of model stationarity in time cannot be tested. In the last four decades, increases in computational capacity (by a factor of a million), and the evolution of new modeling tools, have permitted a corresponding increase in model complexity, in the length of the simulations, and in spatial-temporal resolution. Nevertheless, many predictions of responses such as shifts in range boundaries are often based on coarse spatial and temporal data, for example monthly or yearly averages. Here we model the effects of environmental change on the physiological response of an ecologically and commercially important species of mussel, the fitness of which can have a cascading influence on ecosystem levels. Using a Dynamic Energy Budget (DEB) model integrated with climatic data produced from IPCC-Al B scenarios, we investigated the effect of temporal resolution of physical data on predictions of the growth and reproductive output of the mussel Mytilus galloprovincialis. We ran models using five different temporal scales, 6, 4, 3, 2 and 1 h (derived by interpolating between 6 h points), at 5 Italian locations in the Central Mediterranean Sea, for the period ranging from 2006 to 2009. Results from these models were further compared against the results from a DEB model that used hourly environmental data recorded at the five locations as inputs. Model outputs included estimates of life history traits relevant to ecological performance as well as parameters related to Darwinian fitness. Results showed that predictions of maximum theoretical shell length were similar regardless of which source of environmental data was used. However, while the DEB model using 1-h modeled data produced predictions of reproductive output very similar to those obtained using recorded (hourly) environmental data from the same time period, results using coarser resolution modeled data greatly underestimated reproductive output. Thus, the use of modeled weather data can yield predictions similar to those generated from measured data, but only when data are provided at relatively high frequency. Our results suggest that metrics of model skill can diverge significantly when physical outputs of climate models are applied to biological questions, and that the temporal resolution of environmental data can strongly alter predictions of biological responses to environmental change. (C) 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
RI Dell'Aquila, Alessandro/E-5582-2017
OI Dell'Aquila, Alessandro/0000-0002-5498-6966; Helmuth,
   Brian/0000-0003-0180-3414; SARA', Gianluca/0000-0002-7658-5274
TC 23
Z9 23
SN 0304-3800
EI 1872-7026
PD APR 24
PY 2014
VL 278
BP 1
EP 8
DI 10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2014.01.019
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000334143200001
ER

PT J
AU Seguin, A
   Harvey, EE
   Archambault, P
   Nozais, C
   Gravel, D
AF Seguin, Annie
   Harvey, Eric
   Archambault, Philippe
   Nozais, Christian
   Gravel, Dominique
TI Body size as a predictor of species loss effect on ecosystem functioning
SO SCIENTIFIC REPORTS
DT Article
ID COMPLEX FOOD WEBS; BIODIVERSITY LOSS; EXTINCTIONS; CONSEQUENCES
AB There is an urgent need to develop predictive indicators of the effect of species loss on ecosystem functioning. Body size is often considered as a good indicator because of its relationship to extinction risk and several functional traits. Here, we examined the predictive capacity of species body size in marine and freshwater multitrophic systems. We found a significant, but weak, effect of body size on functioning. The effect was much stronger when considering the effect of body size within trophic position levels. Compared to extinctions ordered by body size, random extinction sequences had lower multiple species loss effects on functioning. Our study is the first to show experimentally, in multitrophic systems, a more negative impact of ordered extinction sequences on ecosystem functioning than random losses. Our results suggest apparent ease in predicting species loss effect on functioning based on easily measured ecological traits that are body size and trophic position.
OI Harvey, Eric/0000-0002-8601-7326
TC 18
Z9 18
SN 2045-2322
PD APR 9
PY 2014
VL 4
AR 4616
DI 10.1038/srep04616
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000333962600001
PM 24714619
ER

PT J
AU Bolam, SG
   Eggleton, JD
AF Bolam, S. G.
   Eggleton, J. D.
TI Macrofaunal production and biological traits: Spatial relationships
   along the UK continental shelf
SO JOURNAL OF SEA RESEARCH
DT Article
DE Benthic Communities; Biological Traits; Secondary Production;
   Continental Shelf; Fuzzy Coding
ID MARINE BENTHIC HABITATS; NORTH-SEA; ECOSYSTEM FUNCTION; ENGLISH-CHANNEL;
   SPECIES TRAITS; FUNCTIONAL COMPOSITION; SECONDARY PRODUCTION;
   INVERTEBRATE COMMUNITIES; SEDIMENTARY HABITATS; SIZE-SPECTRA
AB Biological trait analysis (BTA) is increasingly being employed to improve our understanding of the ecological functioning of marine benthic invertebrate communities. However, changes in trait composition are seldomly compared with concomitant changes in metrics of ecological function. Consequently, inferences regarding the functional implications of any changes are often anecdotal; we currently have a limited understanding of the functional significance of the traits commonly used. In this study, we quantify the relationship between benthic invertebrate trait composition and secondary production estimates using data spanning almost the breadth of the UK continental shelf.
   Communities described by their composition of 10 traits representing life history, morphology and behaviour showed strong relationships with variations in total secondary production. A much weaker relationship was observed for community productivity (or P:B), a measure of rate of energy turnover. Furthermore, the relationship between total production and multivariate taxonomic community composition was far weaker than that for trait composition. Indeed, the similarities between communities as defined by taxonomy were very different from those depicted by their trait composition. That is, as many studies have demonstrated, taxonomically different communities may display similar trait compositions, and vice versa. Finally, we found that descriptions of community trait composition vary greatly depending on whether abundance or biomass is used as the enumeration weighting method during BTA, and trait assessments based on biomass produced better relations with secondary production than those based on abundance. We discuss the significance of these findings with respect to BTA using marine benthic invertebrates. Crown Copyright (C) 2014 Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
TC 27
Z9 27
SN 1385-1101
EI 1873-1414
PD APR
PY 2014
VL 88
BP 47
EP 58
DI 10.1016/j.seares.2014.01.001
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000335871900006
ER

PT J
AU Sommer, B
   Harrison, PL
   Beger, M
   Pandolfi, JM
AF Sommer, Brigitte
   Harrison, Peter L.
   Beger, Maria
   Pandolfi, John M.
TI Trait-mediated environmental filtering drives assembly at biogeographic
   transition zones
SO ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE latitudinal gradient; environmental filtering; community assembly;
   high-latitude reefs; functional traits; biogeography; life-history
   strategy; scleractinian corals; range limit
ID CORAL-REEF; COMMUNITY ECOLOGY; CLIMATE-CHANGE; EASTERN AUSTRALIA;
   SPECIES RICHNESS; DIVERSITY; PATTERNS; MARINE; LIMITS; NICHE
AB Abiotic filtering is a major driver of gradients in the structure and functioning of ecosystems from the tropics to the poles. It is thus likely that environmental filtering is an important assembly process at the transition of biogeographical zones where many species occur at their range limits. Shifts in species abundances and association patterns along environmental gradients can be indicative of environmental filtering, which is predicted to be stronger in areas of high abiotic stress and to promote increased similarity of ecological characteristics among co-occurring species. Here we test these hypotheses for scleractinian corals along a broad latitudinal gradient in high-latitude eastern Australia, where corals occur at the margins of their ranges and environmental tolerances. We quantify variation in taxonomic, zoogeographic, and functional patterns combined with null model approaches and demonstrate systematic spatial variation in community structure and significant covariance of species abundance distributions and functional characteristics along the latitudinal gradient. We describe a strong biogeographic transition zone, consistent with patterns expected under abiotic filtering, whereby species are sorted along the latitudinal gradient according to their tolerances for marginal reef conditions. High-latitude coastal reefs are typified by widely distributed, generalist, stress-tolerant coral species with massive and horizontally spreading morphologies and by diminishing influence of tropical taxa at higher latitudes and closer to the mainland. Higher degree of ecological similarity among co-occurring species than expected by chance supports the environmental filtering hypothesis. Among individual traits, the structural traits corallite size and colony morphology were filtered most strongly, suggesting that characteristics linked to energy acquisition and physical stability may be particularly important for coral survival in high-latitude environments. These findings highlight interspecific differences and species interactions with the environment as key drivers of community organization in biogeographic transition zones and support the hypothesis that environmental filters play a stronger role than biotic interactions in structuring ecological communities in areas of high abiotic stress.
RI Harrison, Peter/B-4763-2011; Beger, Maria/F-9049-2013; Pandolfi,
   John/A-3121-2009
OI Harrison, Peter/0000-0002-4048-2409; Beger, Maria/0000-0003-1363-3571;
   Pandolfi, John/0000-0003-3047-6694
TC 46
Z9 46
SN 0012-9658
EI 1939-9170
PD APR
PY 2014
VL 95
IS 4
BP 1000
EP 1009
DI 10.1890/13-1445.1
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000334573600018
PM 24933818
ER

PT J
AU Brunbjerg, AK
   Cavender-Bares, J
   Eiserhardt, WL
   Ejrnaes, R
   Aarssen, LW
   Buckley, HL
   Forey, E
   Jansen, F
   Kattge, J
   Lane, C
   Lubke, RA
   Moles, AT
   Monserrat, AL
   Peet, RK
   Roncal, J
   Wootton, L
   Svenning, JC
AF Brunbjerg, Ane Kirstine
   Cavender-Bares, Jeannine
   Eiserhardt, Wolf L.
   Ejrnaes, Rasmus
   Aarssen, Lonnie W.
   Buckley, Hannah L.
   Forey, Estelle
   Jansen, Florian
   Kattge, Jens
   Lane, Cynthia
   Lubke, Roy A.
   Moles, Angela T.
   Laura Monserrat, Ana
   Peet, Robert K.
   Roncal, Julissa
   Wootton, Louise
   Svenning, Jens-Christian
TI Multi-scale phylogenetic structure in coastal dune plant communities
   across the globe
SO JOURNAL OF PLANT ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE disturbance; phylogenetic community structure; plant functional traits;
   plant height; seed mass
ID SEED MASS; ENVIRONMENTAL GRADIENTS; SPECIES ASSEMBLAGES; TRAIT
   EVOLUTION; ECOLOGY; PATTERNS; SCALE; VEGETATION; DISPERSAL; DIVERSITY
AB Aims
   Studies integrating phylogenetic history and large-scale community assembly are few, and many questions remain unanswered. Here, we use a global coastal dune plant data set to uncover the important factors in community assembly across scales from the local filtering processes to the global long-term diversification and dispersal dynamics. Coastal dune plant communities occur worldwide under a wide range of climatic and geologic conditions as well as in all biogeographic regions. However, global patterns in the phylogenetic composition of coastal dune plant communities have not previously been studied.
   Methods
   The data set comprised vegetation data from 18463 plots in New Zealand, South Africa, South America, North America and Europe. The phylogenetic tree comprised 2241 plant species from 149 families. We calculated phylogenetic clustering (Net Relatedness Index, NRI, and Nearest Taxon Index, NTI) of regional dune floras to estimate the amount of in situ diversification relative to the global dune species pool and evaluated the relative importance of land and climate barriers for these diversification patterns by geographic analyses of phylogenetic similarity. We then tested whether dune plant communities exhibit similar patterns of phylogenetic structure within regions. Finally, we calculated NRI for local communities relative to the regional species pool and tested for an association with functional traits (plant height and seed mass) thought to vary along sea-inland gradients.
   Important Findings
   Regional species pools were phylogenetically clustered relative to the global pool, indicating regional diversification. NTI showed stronger clustering than NRI pointing to the importance of especially recent diversifications within regions. The species pools grouped phylogenetically into two clusters on either side of the tropics suggesting greater dispersal rates within hemispheres than between hemispheres. Local NRI plot values confirmed that most communities were also phylogenetically clustered within regions. NRI values decreased with increasing plant height and seed mass, indicating greater phylogenetic clustering in communities with short maximum height and good dispersers prone to wind and tidal disturbance as well as salt spray, consistent with environmental filtering along sea-inland gradients. Height and seed mass both showed significant phylogenetic signal, and NRI tended to correlate negatively with both at the plot level. Low NRI plots tended to represent coastal scrub and forest, whereas high NRI plots tended to represent herb-dominated vegetation. We conclude that regional diversification processes play a role in dune plant community assembly, with convergence in local phylogenetic community structure and local variation in community structure probably reflecting consistent coastal-inland gradients. Our study contributes to a better understanding of the globally distributed dynamic coastal ecosystems and the structuring factors working on dune plant communities across spatial scales and regions.
RI Svenning, Jens-Christian/C-8977-2012; Moles, Angela/C-3083-2008;
   Eiserhardt, Wolf/D-7677-2011; Kattge, Jens/J-8283-2016; Buckley,
   Hannah/U-4758-2017; Jansen, Florian/J-5463-2015
OI Svenning, Jens-Christian/0000-0002-3415-0862; Moles,
   Angela/0000-0003-2041-7762; Eiserhardt, Wolf/0000-0002-8136-5233;
   Kattge, Jens/0000-0002-1022-8469; Buckley, Hannah/0000-0002-4170-080X;
   Jansen, Florian/0000-0002-0331-5185; Brunbjerg, Ane
   Kirstine/0000-0003-0666-6535; Roncal, Julissa/0000-0001-8632-4206; Peet,
   Robert/0000-0003-2823-6587; Cavender-Bares, Jeannine/0000-0003-3375-9630
TC 15
Z9 16
SN 1752-9921
EI 1752-993X
PD APR
PY 2014
VL 7
IS 2
SI SI
BP 101
EP 114
DI 10.1093/jpe/rtt069
SC Plant Sciences; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000334928700002
ER

PT J
AU de Oliveira, AA
   Vicentini, A
   Chave, J
   Castanho, CD
   Davies, SJ
   Martini, AMZ
   Lima, RAF
   Ribeiro, RR
   Iribar, A
   Souza, VC
AF de Oliveira, Alexandre A.
   Vicentini, Alberto
   Chave, Jerome
   Castanho, Camila de T.
   Davies, Stuart J.
   Martini, Adriana M. Z.
   Lima, Renato A. F.
   Ribeiro, Ricardo R.
   Iribar, Amaia
   Souza, Vinicius C.
TI Habitat specialization and phylogenetic structure of tree species in a
   coastal Brazilian white-sand forest
SO JOURNAL OF PLANT ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE habitat association; torus-translation test; phylogenetic community
   structure; niche partitioning; edaphic condition
ID RAIN-FOREST; PLANT-COMMUNITIES; ECOLOGICAL COMMUNITIES; LIMITING
   SIMILARITY; DIPTEROCARP FOREST; FUNCTIONAL TRAITS; AMAZONIAN FOREST;
   TROPICAL TREES; DNA BARCODES; NICHE
AB Aims
   The coastal Brazilian rainforest on white-sand (restinga) ranks among the most fragmented forest types in the tropics, owing to both the patchy distribution of sandy soils and widespread coastal development activities. Here we study the environmental and evolutionary determinants of a forest tree assemblage at a single restinga forest in Southeastern Brazil. We also explore the ability of competing hypotheses to explain the maintenance of species diversity in this forest type, which includes contrasting extremes of edaphic conditions associated with flooding stress.
   Methods
   The study was conducted in a white-sand forest permanent plot of 10.24 ha on the coastal plain of Southeastern Brazil. This plot was divided into 256 quadrats of 20 x 20 m, which were classified into two main edaphic habitats (flooded and drained). Trees with a diameter >= 1 cm at breast height were identified. We assembled DNA sequence data for each of the 116 morphospecies recognized using two chloroplast markers (rbcL and matK). A phylogenetic tree was obtained using the maximum likelihood method, and a phylogenetic distance matrix was produced from an ultra-metric tree. We analyzed similarity in floristic composition and structure between habitats and related them to cross-plot distances using permutation procedures. Null model torus shift simulations were performed to obtain a statistical significance level for habitat association for each species. The phylogenetic structure for the two habitats and for each 20 x 20 m quadrat was calculated using the mean phylogenetic distance weighted by species abundance and checked for significance using the standardized effect size generated by 5000 randomizations of phylogenetic tip labels.
   Important Findings
   Our results indicate that partitioning among edaphic habitats is important for explaining species distributions and coexistence in restinga forests. Species distributions within the plot were found to be non-random: there was greater floristic similarity within than between habitats, and >40% of the more abundant species were positively or negatively associated with at least one habitat. Patterns of habitat association were not independent of phylogenetic relatedness: the community was overdispersed with respect to space and habitat type. Closely related species tended to occur in different habitats, while neighboring trees tended to belong to more distantly related species. We conclude that habitat specialization is important for the coexistence of species in restinga forests and that habitat heterogeneity is therefore an essential factor in explaining the maintenance of diversity of this unique but fragile and threatened type of forest.
RI Castanho, Camila/D-4583-2012; Rodrigues, Ricardo Ribeiro/D-5557-2012;
   Lima, Renato/C-6744-2013; Oliveira, Alexandre/G-8830-2012; Martini,
   Adriana/H-7490-2012
OI Castanho, Camila/0000-0002-0198-3200; Rodrigues, Ricardo
   Ribeiro/0000-0003-4818-0736; Lima, Renato/0000-0002-1048-0138; Oliveira,
   Alexandre/0000-0001-5526-8109; Martini, Adriana/0000-0001-8305-3658
TC 12
Z9 12
SN 1752-9921
EI 1752-993X
PD APR
PY 2014
VL 7
IS 2
SI SI
BP 134
EP 144
DI 10.1093/jpe/rtt073
SC Plant Sciences; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000334928700005
ER

PT J
AU Muntadas, A
   Demestre, M
   de Juan, S
   Frid, CLJ
AF Muntadas, Alba
   Demestre, Montserrat
   de Juan, Silvia
   Frid, Chris L. J.
TI Trawling disturbance on benthic ecosystems and consequences on
   commercial species: a northwestern Mediterranean case study
SO SCIENTIA MARINA
DT Article
DE benthos; BTA; functioning; mullet fisheries; trawling; NW Mediterranean
ID MULLUS-BARBATUS; MARINE BIODIVERSITY; FISHING DISTURBANCE; DIFFERENT
   HABITATS; CONTINENTAL-SHELF; RED MULLET; NORTH-SEA; COMMUNITIES;
   RECOVERY; SURMULETUS
AB Trawling is known to disturb benthic communities and habitats, which may in turn indirectly affect populations of commercial species that live in close association with the seabed. The degree of impact on both benthic communities and demersal species depends on the fishing effort level. This may vary over the year because of the fleet dynamics, which are in turn normally driven by the main target species' life cycle. In this study we describe changes in benthic functional components of a northwestern Mediterranean fishing ground that represents a recruitment area for an important target species (red mullet, Mullus barbatus). This fishing ground experiences a varying intensity of fishing effort over the year and benthic functional components under different levels of trawling were compared with an unfished, control area. Traits related to sexual maturity and life span for infauna and body size and life span for epifauna were found to vary with fishing activity. Potential effects of these changes on ecological functioning and the impact on red mullet population are discussed. The development of fisheries management plans under an ecosystem based fisheries management (EBFM) requires the links between target species and benthic communities' disturbance due to fishing practices to be explicitly considered.
RI Demestre, Montserrat/M-1719-2014; de Juan, Silvia/M-2553-2014
OI Demestre, Montserrat/0000-0003-2866-4821; de Juan,
   Silvia/0000-0002-8891-8371; Frid, Christopher/0000-0002-7565-635X
TC 7
Z9 7
SN 0214-8358
EI 1886-8134
PD APR
PY 2014
VL 78
SU 1
BP 53
EP 65
DI 10.3989/scimar.04024.19A
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000333804100006
ER

PT J
AU Daines, SJ
   Clark, JR
   Lenton, TM
AF Daines, Stuart J.
   Clark, James R.
   Lenton, Timothy M.
TI Multiple environmental controls on phytoplankton growth strategies
   determine adaptive responses of the N : P ratio
SO ECOLOGY LETTERS
DT Article
DE traits; stoichiometry; Redfield ratios; phytoplankton; marine;
   Biogeochemistry; N/P; microbial; biogeography
ID NUTRIENT LIMITATION; ELEMENTAL STOICHIOMETRY; MARINE-PHYTOPLANKTON;
   RESOURCE-ALLOCATION; UNICELLULAR ALGAE; CELL-SIZE; PHOSPHORUS; NITROGEN;
   MODEL; OCEAN
AB The controls on the 'Redfield' N:P stoichiometry of marine phytoplankton and hence the N:P ratio of the deep ocean remain incompletely understood. Here, we use a model for phytoplankton ecophysiology and growth, based on functional traits and resource-allocation trade-offs, to show how environmental filtering, biotic interactions, and element cycling in a global ecosystem model determine phytoplankton biogeography, growth strategies and macromolecular composition. Emergent growth strategies capture major observed patterns in marine biomes. Using a new synthesis of experimental RNA and protein measurements to constrain per-ribosome translation rates, we determine a spatially variable lower limit on adaptive rRNA:protein allocation and hence on the relationship between the largest cellular P and N pools. Comparison with the lowest observed phytoplankton N:P ratios and N:P export fluxes in the Southern Ocean suggests that additional contributions from phospholipid and phosphorus storage compounds play a fundamental role in determining the marine biogeochemical cycling of these elements.
RI Lenton, Tim/X-1893-2018
OI Lenton, Tim/0000-0002-6725-7498
TC 37
Z9 40
SN 1461-023X
EI 1461-0248
PD APR
PY 2014
VL 17
IS 4
BP 414
EP 425
DI 10.1111/ele.12239
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000332206400002
PM 24418348
ER

PT J
AU Dwyer, GK
   Stoffels, RJ
   Pridmore, PA
AF Dwyer, Georgia K.
   Stoffels, Rick J.
   Pridmore, Peter A.
TI Morphology, metabolism and behaviour: responses of three fishes with
   different lifestyles to acute hypoxia
SO FRESHWATER BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE community ecology; functional traits; fresh water; animal behaviour;
   ecophysiology
ID AQUATIC SURFACE RESPIRATION; REBUILDING COMMUNITY ECOLOGY; FRESH-WATER
   FISHES; PROGRESSIVE HYPOXIA; FUNCTIONAL TRAITS; ENVIRONMENTAL HYPOXIA;
   PHYSIOLOGICAL STRESS; SWIMMING PERFORMANCE; HEMOGLOBIN-FUNCTION;
   BUOYANCY CONTROL
AB Behavioural responses to changing environments affect community composition, so the identification of associations between environmental gradients, behavioural traits and physiological traits makes a significant contribution to the quest for trait-based rules of community change.
   We tested the hypothesis that fish morphology and lifestyle are associated with metabolic rate, hence oxygen demand, and behavioural response to gradual hypoxia [low dissolved oxygen (DO)], using respirometry and behavioural experiments. Three species fell along different points of the fast-slow lifestyle continuum: Melanotaenia fluviatilis, a pelagic fish adapted to endurance swimming, lies at the fast end of the lifestyle continuum, while Mogurnda adspersa, a benthic fish adapted to burst swimming, lies at the other end. The benthopelagic Hypseleotris sp. has an intermediate lifestyle.
   Standard and routine metabolic rates varied strongly among the species and were associated with lifestyle according to the inequality M.fluviatilis>Hypseleotris>M.adspersa. As DO declined, aquatic surface respiration behaviour also varied significantly among the species and indicated a sensitivity to hypoxia described by the same inequality. As hypoxia ensued, changes in habitat were also linked to lifestyle, but changes in activity level among species were not neatly correlated with lifestyle.
   Overall, our experiments imply that there are significant links between morphology, lifestyle, metabolism and behavioural response to hypoxia in these three species of fish.
RI Stoffels, Rick/H-3595-2011
TC 10
Z9 10
SN 0046-5070
EI 1365-2427
PD APR
PY 2014
VL 59
IS 4
BP 819
EP 831
DI 10.1111/fwb.12306
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000332220100014
ER

PT J
AU Cohen, JS
   Rainford, SKD
   Blossey, B
AF Cohen, J. S.
   Rainford, S-K D.
   Blossey, B.
TI Community-weighted mean functional effect traits determine larval
   amphibian responses to litter mixtures
SO OECOLOGIA
DT Article
DE Benthic; Biodiversity; Detritus; Functional diversity; Tadpole
ID TALLOW TRIADICA-SEBIFERA; INVASIVE PLANT; ANURAN LARVAE; LEAF TRAITS;
   TADPOLE PERFORMANCE; DIVERSITY INDEXES; CANOPY COVER; BIODIVERSITY;
   DECOMPOSITION; ECOSYSTEMS
AB Plant species composition is changing across many landscapes, but it is unclear how these changes affect habitat quality for animals. We used functional diversity and community-weighted mean (CWM) trait values for four plant traits (litter N, P, lignin and soluble phenolics) to explore how changes in plant species composition may affect larval amphibians in a simplified aquatic ecosystem. We predicted that increased functional diversity would improve amphibian performance (survivorship, developmental rate, and size). We also predicted that increases in CWM N and P would improve amphibian performance, while increases in CWM lignin and soluble phenolics would have negative effects on amphibian performance. We did not detect an effect of functional diversity; instead, CWM litter N and soluble phenolics were useful predictors of amphibian performance. We demonstrate that quantifying the CWM of ecologically relevant traits represents a powerful approach for predicting how changes in plant species composition can affect aquatic communities.
TC 8
Z9 8
SN 0029-8549
EI 1432-1939
PD APR
PY 2014
VL 174
IS 4
BP 1359
EP 1366
DI 10.1007/s00442-013-2856-8
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000333171400028
PM 24402130
ER

PT J
AU Ziemert, N
   Lechner, A
   Wietz, M
   Millan-Aguinaga, N
   Chavarria, KL
   Jensen, PR
AF Ziemert, Nadine
   Lechner, Anna
   Wietz, Matthias
   Millan-Aguinaga, Natalie
   Chavarria, Krystle L.
   Jensen, Paul Robert
TI Diversity and evolution of secondary metabolism in the marine
   actinomycete genus Salinispora
SO PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES OF THE UNITED STATES OF
   AMERICA
DT Article
DE genome sequencing; comparative genomics
ID POLYKETIDE SYNTHASES; NATURAL-PRODUCTS; COMBINATORIAL BIOSYNTHESIS;
   MAXIMUM-LIKELIHOOD; DRUG DISCOVERY; SP NOV.; SEQUENCE; BACTERIA; GENES;
   ANTIBIOTICS
AB Access to genome sequence data has challenged traditional natural product discovery paradigms by revealing that the products of most bacterial biosynthetic pathways have yet to be discovered. Despite the insight afforded by this technology, little is known about the diversity and distributions of natural product biosynthetic pathways among bacteria and how they evolve to generate structural diversity. Here we analyze genome sequence data derived from 75 strains of the marine actinomycete genus Salinispora for pathways associated with polyketide and nonribosomal peptide biosynthesis, the products of which account for some of today's most important medicines. The results reveal high levels of diversity, with a total of 124 pathways identified and 229 predicted with continued sequencing. Recent horizontal gene transfer accounts for the majority of pathways, which occur in only one or two strains. Acquired pathways are incorporated into genomic islands and are commonly exchanged within and between species. Acquisition and transfer events largely involve complete pathways, which subsequently evolve by gene gain, loss, and duplication followed by divergence. The exchange of similar pathway types at the precise chromosomal locations in different strains suggests that the mechanisms of integration include pathway-level homologous recombination. Despite extensive horizontal gene transfer there is clear evidence of species-level vertical inheritance, supporting the concept that secondary metabolites represent functional traits that help define Salinispora species. The plasticity of the Salinispora secondary metabolome provides an effective mechanism to maximize population-level secondary metabolite diversity while limiting the number of pathways maintained within any individual genome.
RI Ziemert, Nadine/H-1935-2015
OI Ziemert, Nadine/0000-0002-7264-1857; Wietz, Matthias/0000-0002-9786-3026
TC 99
Z9 99
SN 0027-8424
PD MAR 25
PY 2014
VL 111
IS 12
BP E1130
EP E1139
DI 10.1073/pnas.1324161111
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000333341100011
PM 24616526
ER

PT J
AU Yoshida, K
   Makino, T
   Yamaguchi, K
   Shigenobu, S
   Hasebe, M
   Kawata, M
   Kume, M
   Mori, S
   Peichel, CL
   Toyoda, A
   Fujiyama, A
   Kitano, J
AF Yoshida, Kohta
   Makino, Takashi
   Yamaguchi, Katsushi
   Shigenobu, Shuji
   Hasebe, Mitsuyasu
   Kawata, Masakado
   Kume, Manabu
   Mori, Seiichi
   Peichel, Catherine L.
   Toyoda, Atsushi
   Fujiyama, Asao
   Kitano, Jun
TI Sex Chromosome Turnover Contributes to Genomic Divergence between
   Incipient Stickleback Species
SO PLOS GENETICS
DT Article
ID EFFECTIVE POPULATION-SIZE; THREESPINE STICKLEBACK; X-CHROMOSOME;
   REPRODUCTIVE ISOLATION; Y-CHROMOSOME; SYMPATRIC FORMS; EVOLUTION;
   DROSOPHILA; RECOMBINATION; GENES
AB Sex chromosomes turn over rapidly in some taxonomic groups, where closely related species have different sex chromosomes. Although there are many examples of sex chromosome turnover, we know little about the functional roles of sex chromosome turnover in phenotypic diversification and genomic evolution. The sympatric pair of Japanese threespine stickleback (Gasterosteus aculeatus) provides an excellent system to address these questions: the Japan Sea species has a neo-sex chromosome system resulting from a fusion between an ancestral Y chromosome and an autosome, while the sympatric Pacific Ocean species has a simple XY sex chromosome system. Furthermore, previous quantitative trait locus (QTL) mapping demonstrated that the Japan Sea neo-X chromosome contributes to phenotypic divergence and reproductive isolation between these sympatric species. To investigate the genomic basis for the accumulation of genes important for speciation on the neo-X chromosome, we conducted whole genome sequencing of males and females of both the Japan Sea and the Pacific Ocean species. No substantial degeneration has yet occurred on the neo-Y chromosome, but the nucleotide sequence of the neo-X and the neo-Y has started to diverge, particularly at regions near the fusion. The neo-sex chromosomes also harbor an excess of genes with sex-biased expression. Furthermore, genes on the neo-X chromosome showed higher non-synonymous substitution rates than autosomal genes in the Japan Sea lineage. Genomic regions of higher sequence divergence between species, genes with divergent expression between species, and QTL for inter-species phenotypic differences were found not only at the regions near the fusion site, but also at other regions along the neo-X chromosome. Neo-sex chromosomes can therefore accumulate substitutions causing species differences even in the absence of substantial neo-Y degeneration.
RI Kawata, Masakado/E-3962-2012; Kume, Manabu/Y-5237-2018
OI Kume, Manabu/0000-0001-7287-029X; Yamaguchi,
   Katsushi/0000-0001-6871-7882; Hasebe, Mitsuyasu/0000-0001-7425-8758;
   Makino, Takashi/0000-0003-4600-9353
TC 35
Z9 35
SN 1553-7390
EI 1553-7404
PD MAR
PY 2014
VL 10
IS 3
AR e1004223
DI 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004223
SC Genetics & Heredity
UT WOS:000337144700047
PM 24625862
ER

PT J
AU Micheli, F
   Mumby, PJ
   Brumbaugh, DR
   Broad, K
   Dahlgren, CP
   Harborne, AR
   Holmes, KE
   Kappel, CV
   Litvin, SY
   Sanchirico, JN
AF Micheli, Fiorenza
   Mumby, Peter J.
   Brumbaugh, Daniel R.
   Broad, Kenny
   Dahlgren, Craig P.
   Harborne, Alastair R.
   Holmes, Katherine E.
   Kappel, Carrie V.
   Litvin, Steven Y.
   Sanchirico, James N.
TI High vulnerability of ecosystem function and services to diversity loss
   in Caribbean coral reefs
SO BIOLOGICAL CONSERVATION
DT Article
DE Biodiversity; Coral reef; Ecosystem functioning; Ecosystem services;
   Functional diversity; Functional redundancy; Marine reserve
ID TAKE MARINE RESERVES; BIODIVERSITY LOSS; COMMUNITY STRUCTURE; CURRENT
   KNOWLEDGE; SPECIES RICHNESS; FISH COMMUNITIES; REDUNDANCY; RESILIENCE;
   HABITATS; PREDATOR
AB Determining how ecosystem function and services are related to diversity is necessary for predicting the consequences of diversity loss and for setting goals and priorities for marine conservation. The consequences of biodiversity loss for ecosystem functions and services depend on the level of functional redundancy - the number of species with similar ecological functional traits. Using field data on fish assemblages from 199 coral reef and lagoon sites from six islands, and on local fisheries from four islands in The Bahamas, we examined levels of functional diversity and redundancy within these assemblages and determined how fish biomass and local fisheries catches vary with local diversity. A majority of functional groups contain few species, suggesting that these assemblages have limited functional redundancy. Most also include species targeted by local fisheries, thus fishing has the potential to broadly impact food webs. Comparisons between a large marine reserve and fished reefs confirm that fishing significantly reduces functional redundancy and removes whole functional groups. Positive exponential relationships of fish biomass and fisheries catches with species and functional diversity highlight that even small declines in biodiversity may result in large reductions in secondary production and seafood provision. Taken together, these results indicate that Caribbean fish assemblages have low functional redundancy and high vulnerability of ecosystem functions and services to diversity loss, and that protection of multi-species assemblages is needed to maintain functions and services. (C) 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
RI Mumby, Peter/F-9914-2010; Harborne, Alastair/F-6155-2013
OI Mumby, Peter/0000-0002-6297-9053; Harborne, Alastair/0000-0002-6818-8615
TC 39
Z9 39
SN 0006-3207
EI 1873-2917
PD MAR
PY 2014
VL 171
BP 186
EP 194
DI 10.1016/j.biocon.2013.12.029
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000335486400021
ER

PT J
AU Best, RJ
   Stachowicz, JJ
AF Best, Rebecca J.
   Stachowicz, John J.
TI Phenotypic and phylogenetic evidence for the role of food and habitat in
   the assembly of communities of marine amphipods
SO ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE amphipod; coexistence; community phylogenetics; competition; grazer;
   habitat partitioning; phylogenetic signal; relatedness within
   communities; seagrass; trait structure
ID HOST-PLANT SPECIALIZATION; INTEGRATING PHYLOGENIES; LIMITING SIMILARITY;
   TRAIT DIVERSITY; NULL MODELS; ECOLOGY; EVOLUTION; PATTERNS; PREDATION;
   ABUNDANCE
AB The study of community assembly processes currently involves (a) long-standing questions about the relative importance of environmental filtering vs. niche partitioning in a wide range of ecosystems, and (b) more recent questions about methodology. The rapidly growing field of community phylogenetics has generated debate about the choice between functional traits and phylogenetic relationships for understanding species similarities, and has raised additional questions about the contribution of experimental vs. observational approaches to understanding evolutionary constraints on community assembly. In this study, we use traits, a phylogeny, and field surveys to identify the forces structuring communities of herbivorous marine amphipods and isopods living in adjacent seagrass and macroalgae. In addition, we compare our field results to a recently published mesocosm experiment that tested the effects of both trait and phylogenetic diversity on coexistence using the same species and system. With respect to community assembly processes, we found that environmental filtering was the dominant process in macroalgae habitats, that niche partitioning was the dominant process in seagrass habitats, and that the strength of these assembly mechanisms varied with seasonal fluctuations in environmental conditions and resource availability. These patterns are indicated by both phylogenetic relationships and trait distances, but the type of resources being partitioned in seagrass habitats can only be deciphered using trait data. Species coexisting in seagrass in the field differed not in their feeding niche but in traits related to microhabitat use, providing novel evidence of the relative importance of competition for food vs. habitat in structuring communities of phytophagous invertebrates. With respect to methodology, the results for seagrass habitats conflict with those obtained in mesocosms, where feeding trait diversity did promote coexistence and phylogenetic diversity had no effect. This contrast arises because a greater range of traits (some of which have much stronger phylogenetic signal than feeding traits) contribute to community assembly in the field. This highlights a mismatch between the processes that drive community assembly in the field and the processes we isolated in experimental tests, and illustrates that using phylogeny as a single proxy in both contexts may impede the synthesis of observational and experimental results.
RI Best, Rebecca/D-2934-2013
OI Best, Rebecca/0000-0003-2103-064X
TC 13
Z9 13
SN 0012-9658
EI 1939-9170
PD MAR
PY 2014
VL 95
IS 3
BP 775
EP 786
DI 10.1890/13-0163.1
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000332823100024
PM 24804460
ER

PT J
AU Shchekinova, EY
   Loder, MGJ
   Boersma, M
   Wiltshire, KH
AF Shchekinova, Elena Y.
   Loeder, Martin G. J.
   Boersma, Maarten
   Wiltshire, Karen H.
TI Facilitation of intraguild prey by its intraguild predator in a
   three-species Lotka-Volterra model
SO THEORETICAL POPULATION BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE Intraguild predation; Immobilization; Multiple resource phenotypes;
   Stable coexistence; Marine microzooplankton
ID FOOD-CHAINS; FUNCTIONAL-RESPONSES; ENRICHMENT; DYNAMICS; STABILITY;
   OMNIVORY; COMMUNITIES; PRODUCTIVITY; COMPETITORS; SUPPRESSION
AB Explaining the coexistence of multiple species in the competition and predation theatre has proven a great challenge. Traditional intraguild predation (IGP) models have only relatively small regions of stable coexistence of all species. Here, we investigate potential additional mechanisms that extend these regions of stable coexistence. We used a 3-species Lotka-Volterra system to which we added an interaction term to model a unidirectional facilitative relationship between the two predators in the IGP. In this modelling study the IG predator was able to precondition a part of the common resource by an instantaneous manipulation, which resulted in the immobilization of the resource species. This mechanism of immobilization facilitated the resource uptake by the IG prey and thus increased its growth rates even in the presence of the common predator. The facilitative relationship of the IG prey by the IG predator produced a stable coexistence of both predators even though the IG prey was an inferior competitor for a common resource, which cannot be attained with the traditional IGP models. Furthermore, our model predicted a 3-species stable coexistence even at high enrichment where no coexistence was found in the basic IGP model. Thus, we showed that diversity of resource traits could significantly alter emergent community patterns via shifts in exploitative competition of IGP-related predators. The described mechanism could potentially lead to a higher efficiency in exploitation of common resources and thus promote higher diversity in a real community. (C) 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
RI Boersma, Maarten/A-5475-2013; Wiltshire, Karen/N-9494-2017
OI Boersma, Maarten/0000-0003-1010-026X; Wiltshire,
   Karen/0000-0002-7148-0529
TC 5
Z9 5
SN 0040-5809
EI 1096-0325
PD MAR
PY 2014
VL 92
BP 55
EP 61
DI 10.1016/j.tpb.2013.11.005
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Evolutionary Biology; Genetics &
   Heredity; Mathematical & Computational Biology
UT WOS:000332905800007
PM 24325813
ER

PT J
AU Moeller, HV
   Peay, KG
   Fukami, T
AF Moeller, Holly V.
   Peay, Kabir G.
   Fukami, Tadashi
TI Ectomycorrhizal fungal traits reflect environmental conditions along a
   coastal California edaphic gradient
SO FEMS MICROBIOLOGY ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE ectomycorrhizae; environmental gradients; exploration types; foraging
   traits; mutualisms; Pinus muricata
ID PYGMY FOREST REGION; NORTHERN CALIFORNIA; ENHANCED SPECIFICITY; CARBON
   ALLOCATION; EXPLORATION TYPES; ROOT DISTRIBUTION; ENZYME-ACTIVITIES;
   HOST-SPECIFICITY; PINUS-CONTORTA; SOIL
AB Multispecies mutualisms, such as the association between trees and ectomycorrhizal fungi, are often shaped by environmental context. Here, we explored the functional mechanisms underlying this environmental filtering. Using a single population of Pinus muricata (Bishop pine) growing along a strong edaphic gradient, we examined how environmental stress affected ectomycorrhizal fungi. The gradient spans c.400000years of soil age, and reduced nutrient availability and increased water stress dwarf trees on older sites. Fungal community composition shifted with nutrient and water availability and with the stature of the P.muricata host trees. Not only did pygmy trees host a taxonomically different fungal subset as compared to nonpygmy trees, but associated fungal communities also differed in life history strategies: trees in more stressful conditions hosted fungi with more carbon-intensive foraging strategies. Our results indicate a link between environmental controls of host nutritional status and turnover in the ectomycorrhizal fungal community. The transition to more energy-intensive strategies under nutrient stress may allow for close recycling of recalcitrant nutrient pools within the root zone and facilitate transport of nutrients and water over long distances. These results highlight the value of life history data to understanding the mechanistic underpinnings of species distributions.
RI Fukami, Tadashi/A-2934-2010
OI Fukami, Tadashi/0000-0001-5654-4785; Peay, Kabir/0000-0002-7998-7412;
   Moeller, Holly/0000-0002-9335-0039
TC 20
Z9 20
SN 0168-6496
EI 1574-6941
PD MAR
PY 2014
VL 87
IS 3
BP 797
EP 806
DI 10.1111/1574-6941.12265
SC Microbiology
UT WOS:000332207200020
PM 24289145
ER

PT J
AU Lewis, RJ
   Marrs, RH
   Pakeman, RJ
AF Lewis, Rob J.
   Marrs, Rob H.
   Pakeman, Robin J.
TI Inferring temporal shifts in landuse intensity from functional response
   traits and functional diversity patterns: a study of Scotland's machair
   grassland
SO OIKOS
DT Article
ID LIMITING SIMILARITY; USE INTENSIFICATION; PLANT TRAITS;
   COMPETITIVE-EXCLUSION; COMMUNITY COMPOSITION; ASSEMBLY PROCESSES;
   SPECIES RICHNESS; PRODUCTIVITY; DISTURBANCE; LANDSCAPE
AB Plant functional response traits, which consistently respond to the environment, are useful for identifying drivers of vegetation change, particularly in response to disturbance gradients. Similarly, functional diversity indices have proven useful for investigating processes governing community assembly, particularly patterns of functional convergence/divergence. This study investigated the functional ecology of biodiverse, seminatural coastal grasslands (Scottish machair) at the national scale. We examined temporal shifts in functional response traits and functional diversity metrics using a series of null model, multivariate and regression analyses. The aim was to link temporal shifts in traits and diversity metrics to environmental variables in which to gauge the contribution of landuse change to plant functional composition and processes governing plant assembly. We observed significant shifts in the composition of 8 out of 12 functional response traits at the national scale, whereas at the regional scale all traits displayed at least one significant shift. Ordination of response traits found PC axis 1 (accounting for 39% of the variation) to be positively correlated to vegetation height and negatively correlated to specific leaf area, similar to that expected along a disturbance gradient. Significant changes in functional diversity indices were also observed at both national and regional scales, with varying convergence/divergence patterns observed across individual regions. We found functional richness (t = 4.87, p < 0.001) and divergence (t = 9.3, p < 0.001) to increase along PC axis 1, suggesting greater convergence and lower divergence along a disturbance gradient. This study demonstrates the potential for using functional diversity indices in combination with response traits as a sensitive method for detecting landuse change and its impacts on biodiversity. We conclude that landuse change, particularly management declines and intensification is a major driver governing change among the functional composition and functional diversity for machair grasslands, influencing convergence/divergence patterns, and subsequently community assembly processes.
RI Pakeman, Robin/P-7338-2015
OI Pakeman, Robin/0000-0001-6248-4133
TC 13
Z9 16
SN 0030-1299
EI 1600-0706
PD MAR
PY 2014
VL 123
IS 3
BP 334
EP 344
DI 10.1111/j.1600-0706.2013.00979.x
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000331660800006
ER

PT J
AU Luo, HW
   Tolar, BB
   Swan, BK
   Zhang, CLL
   Stepanauskas, R
   Moran, MA
   Hollibaugh, JT
AF Luo, Haiwei
   Tolar, Bradley B.
   Swan, Brandon K.
   Zhang, Chuanlun L.
   Stepanauskas, Ramunas
   Moran, Mary Ann
   Hollibaugh, James T.
TI Single-cell genomics shedding light on marine Thaumarchaeota
   diversification
SO ISME JOURNAL
DT Article
DE marine group I Archaea; Thaumarchaeota; single-cell genomics;
   nitrification; ammonia oxidation
ID AMMONIA-OXIDIZING ARCHAEON; FRANCISCO BAY ESTUARY; PHYLOGENETIC
   ANALYSES; PACIFIC-OCEAN; BACTERIA; SEQUENCE; OXIDATION; NITRIFICATION;
   CRENARCHAEOTA; MODELS
AB Previous studies based on analysis of amoA, 16S ribosomal RNA or accA gene sequences have established that marine Thaumarchaeota fall into two phylogenetically distinct groups corresponding to shallow-and deep-water clades, but it is not clear how water depth interacts with other environmental factors, including light, temperature and location, to affect this pattern of diversification. Earlier studies focused on single-gene distributions were not able to link phylogenetic structure to other aspects of functional adaptation. Here, we analyzed the genome content of 46 uncultivated single Thaumarchaeota cells sampled from epi-and mesopelagic waters of subtropical, temperate and polar oceans. Phylogenomic analysis showed that populations diverged by depth, as expected, and that mesopelagic populations from different locations were well mixed. Functional analysis showed that some traits, including putative DNA photolyase and catalase genes that may be related to adaptive mechanisms to reduce light-induced damage, were found exclusively in members of the epipelagic clade. Our analysis of partial genomes has thus confirmed the depth differentiation of Thaumarchaeota populations observed previously, consistent with the distribution of putative mechanisms to reduce light-induced damage in shallow-and deep-water populations.
RI Swan, Brandon/O-9824-2018
OI Swan, Brandon/0000-0003-0465-1444; Stepanauskas,
   Ramunas/0000-0003-4458-3108; Moran, Mary Ann/0000-0002-0702-8167
TC 43
Z9 43
SN 1751-7362
EI 1751-7370
PD MAR
PY 2014
VL 8
IS 3
BP 732
EP 736
DI 10.1038/ismej.2013.202
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Microbiology
UT WOS:000331879900021
PM 24196320
ER

PT J
AU Binning, SA
   Roche, DG
   Fulton, CJ
AF Binning, Sandra A.
   Roche, Dominique G.
   Fulton, Christopher J.
TI Localised intraspecific variation in the swimming phenotype of a coral
   reef fish across different wave exposures
SO OECOLOGIA
DT Article
DE Aerobic capacity; Aspect ratio; Critical swimming speed; Metabolic rate;
   Respirometry
ID INDIAN ANOLIS LIZARDS; GREAT-BARRIER-REEF; ACANTHOCHROMIS-POLYACANTHUS;
   WATER MOTION; PERFORMANCE; MORPHOLOGY; DISPERSAL; DIVERSITY;
   ECOMORPHOLOGY; POMACENTRIDAE
AB Wave-driven water flow is a major force structuring marine communities. Species distributions are partly determined by the ability to cope with variation in water flow, such as differences in the assemblage of fish species found in a given water flow environment being linked to swimming ability (based on fin shape and mode of locomotion). It remains unclear, however, whether similar assembly rules apply within a species. Here we show phenotypic variation among sites in traits functionally linked to swimming ability in the damselfish Acanthochromis polyacanthus. These sites differ in wave energy and the observed patterns of phenotypic differences within A. polyacanthus closely mirrored those seen at the interspecific level. Fish from high-exposure sites had more tapered fins and higher maximum metabolic rates than conspecifics from sheltered sites. This translates to a 36 % larger aerobic scope and 33 % faster critical swimming speed for fish from exposed sites. Our results suggest that functional relationships among swimming phenotypes and water flow not only structure species assemblages, but can also shape patterns of phenotypic divergence within species. Close links between locomotor phenotype and local water flow conditions appear to be important for species distributions as well as phenotypic divergence across environmental gradients.
RI Fulton, Christopher/A-5971-2008
OI Fulton, Christopher/0000-0002-1140-1999; Roche,
   Dominique/0000-0002-3326-864X; Binning, Sandra/0000-0002-2804-9979
TC 19
Z9 20
SN 0029-8549
EI 1432-1939
PD MAR
PY 2014
VL 174
IS 3
BP 623
EP 630
DI 10.1007/s00442-013-2794-5
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000332002300002
PM 24132502
ER

PT J
AU Bermudez, R
   Retuerto, R
AF Bermudez, Raimundo
   Retuerto, Ruben
TI Together but different: co-occurring dune plant species differ in their
   water- and nitrogen-use strategies
SO OECOLOGIA
DT Article
DE Comparative physiology; Stable isotopes; Limiting similarity; Niche
   differentiation; Species coexistence
ID CARBON-ISOTOPE DISCRIMINATION; SINAPIS-ALBA L; FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY;
   LIMITING SIMILARITY; NATURAL ABUNDANCES; BIOMASS ALLOCATION; STOMATAL
   DENSITY; TROPICAL FOREST; USE EFFICIENCY; LEAF-AREA
AB Stress factors may severely constrain the range of plant physiological responses in harsh environments. Convergence of traits is expected in coastal dunes because of environmental filtering imposed by severe abiotic factors. However, the wide range of morphological and phenological traits exhibited by coexisting dune species suggests considerable variation in functional traits. We hypothesized that the constraints imposed by structural traits ought to translate into physiological differences. Five dominant species with different morphological traits, but coexisting in a homogeneous dune area in Northwest Spain, were selected for study. Soil characteristics and leaf functional traits were measured in April, June and November 2008. Integrated water-use efficiency (assessed by C isotope discrimination) and N acquisition and use strategies (estimated by N isotope composition) varied significantly among species and the differences changed over time. Species differences in specific leaf area, relative water content, leaf N and C:N ratio, also varied over time. The species differed in stomatal density but not in soil characteristics, with the exception of pH. Species differences in functional traits related to the use of resources suggest species niche segregation. Species-specific temporal effects on the use of these resources support temporal niche differentiation. Somewhat in contrast to the findings of previous studies on harsh environments, this study revealed a considerable level of functional diversity and complexity, suggesting that dune plant species have evolved species-specific strategies to survive by partitioning growth-limiting resources.
RI Retuerto, Ruben/B-4853-2008
OI Retuerto, Ruben/0000-0002-9879-5512
TC 13
Z9 13
SN 0029-8549
EI 1432-1939
PD MAR
PY 2014
VL 174
IS 3
BP 651
EP 663
DI 10.1007/s00442-013-2820-7
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000332002300005
PM 24213627
ER

EF