FN Clarivate Analytics Web of Science
VR 1.0
PT J
AU Cuthbert, RN
   Al-Jaibachi, R
   Dalu, T
   Dick, JTA
   Callaghan, A
AF Cuthbert, Ross N.
   Al-Jaibachi, Rana
   Dalu, Tatenda
   Dick, Jaimie T. A.
   Callaghan, Amanda
TI The influence of microplastics on trophic interaction strengths and
   oviposition preferences of dipterans
SO SCIENCE OF THE TOTAL ENVIRONMENT
DT Article
DE Food chain; Predator-prey; Microplastics transference; Functional
   response; Chaoborus; Culex
ID FUNCTIONAL-RESPONSES; PREDATION; POLLUTION; SELECTION; RISK; LAKE
AB Microplastic (MP) pollution continues to proliferate in freshwater, marine and terrestrial environments, but with their biotic implications remaining poorly understood. Biotic interactions such as predation can profoundly influence ecosystem structuring, stability and functioning. However, we currently lack quantitative understandings of how trophic interaction strengths and associated behaviours are influenced by MP pollution, and how transference of MPs between trophic levels relates to consumptive traits. We also lack understanding of key life-history effects of MPs, for example, reproductive strategies such as oviposition. The present study examines the predatory ability of non-biting midge larvae, Chaoborus flavicans, towards larvae of Culex pipiens mosquitoes when the latter are exposed to MPs, using a functional response (FR) approach. Transfer of MPs occurred from larval mosquitoes to larval midges via predation. Microplastics transfer was significantly positively related to predation rates. Predation by C. flavicans followed a Type II FR, with average maximum feeding rates of 6.2 mosquito larvae per hour. These and other FR parameters (attack rates and handling times) were not significantly influenced by the presence of MPs. Further, C. pipiens adults did not avoid ovipositing in habitats with high concentrations of MPs. We thus demonstrate that MPs can move readily through freshwater food webs via biotic processes such as predation, and that uptake correlates strongly with consumption rates. Further, as MPs do not deter adult mosquitoes from ovipositing, our experiments reveal high potential for MP exposure and transference through ecosystems. (C) 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
RI Dalu, Tatenda/K-3089-2012
OI Dalu, Tatenda/0000-0002-9019-7702; Callaghan, Amanda/0000-0002-2731-3352
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0048-9697
EI 1879-1026
PD FEB 15
PY 2019
VL 651
BP 2420
EP 2423
DI 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.10.108
PN 2
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000450551600073
PM 30336431
ER

PT J
AU Pilotto, F
   Tonkin, JD
   Januschke, K
   Lorenz, AW
   Jourdan, J
   Sundermann, A
   Hering, D
   Stoll, S
   Haase, P
AF Pilotto, Francesca
   Tonkin, Jonathan D.
   Januschke, Kathrin
   Lorenz, Armin W.
   Jourdan, Jonas
   Sundermann, Andrea
   Hering, Daniel
   Stoll, Stefan
   Haase, Peter
TI Diverging response patterns of terrestrial and aquatic species to
   hydromorphological restoration
SO CONSERVATION BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE functional diversity; multibiotic diversity; riparian; river floodplain;
   stream restoration; taxonomic composition; trait composition
ID RESTORED RIVER REACHES; IN-STREAM RESTORATION; BENTHIC INVERTEBRATES;
   GROUND BEETLES; HETEROGENEITY; COMMUNITIES; DISPERSAL; DIVERSITY;
   COLONIZATION; BIODIVERSITY
AB Although experiences with ecological restoration continue to accumulate, the effectiveness of restoration for biota remains debated. We complemented a traditional taxonomic analysis approach with information on 56 species traits to uncover the responses of 3 aquatic (fish, macroinvertebrates, macrophytes) and 2 terrestrial (carabid beetles, floodplain vegetation) biotic groups to 43 hydromorphological river restoration projects in Germany. All taxonomic groups responded positively to restoration, as shown by increased taxonomic richness (10-164%) and trait diversity (habitat, dispersal and mobility, size, form, life history, and feeding groups) (15-120%). Responses, however, were stronger for terrestrial than aquatic biota, and, contrary to our expectation, taxonomic responses were stronger than those of traits. Nevertheless, trait analysis provided mechanistic insights into the drivers of community change following restoration. Trait analysis for terrestrial biota indicated restoration success was likely enhanced by lateral connectivity and reestablishment of dynamic processes in the floodplain. The weaker response of aquatic biota suggests recovery was hindered by the persistence of stressors in the aquatic environment, such as degraded water quality, dispersal constraints, and insufficient hydromorphological change. Therefore, river restoration requires combined local- and regional-scale approaches to maximize the response of both aquatic and terrestrial organisms. Due to the contrasting responses of aquatic and terrestrial biota, the planning and assessment of river restoration outcomes should consider effects on both components of riverine landscapes.
RI Stoll, Stefan/D-5278-2011
OI Stoll, Stefan/0000-0002-3656-417X; Jourdan, Jonas/0000-0002-2745-2520
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0888-8892
EI 1523-1739
PD FEB
PY 2019
VL 33
IS 1
BP 132
EP 141
DI 10.1111/cobi.13176
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000455121500014
PM 29947087
ER

PT J
AU Hewitt, JE
   Lundquist, CJ
   Ellis, J
AF Hewitt, Judi E.
   Lundquist, Carolyn J.
   Ellis, Joanne
TI Assessing sensitivities of marine areas to stressors based on biological
   traits
SO CONSERVATION BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE anthropogenic activities; benthic species; extraction; risk assessment;
   sedimentation; simulated impacts; suspended sediments
ID BENTHIC COMMUNITIES; ECOSYSTEM FUNCTION; FUNCTIONAL TRAITS; DISTURBANCE;
   DIVERSITY; VULNERABILITY; HABITATS; SEDIMENT; BIODIVERSITY; RESILIENCE
AB Analysis of the biological traits (e.g., feeding mode and size) that control how organisms interact with their environment has been used to identify environmental drivers of, or impacts on, species and to explain the importance of biodiversity loss. Biological trait analysis (BTA) could also be used within risk-assessment frameworks or in conservation planning if one understands the groups of traits that predict the sensitivity of habitats or communities to specific human activities. Deriving sensitivities from BTA should extend sensitivity predictions to a variety of habitats, especially those in which it would be difficult to conduct experiments (e.g., due to depth or risk to human life) and to scales beyond the norm of most experiments. We used data on epibenthos, collected via video along transects at 27 sites in a relatively pristine region of the seafloor, to determine scales of natural spatial variability of derived sensitivities and the degree to which predictions of sensitivity differed among 3 stressors (extraction of species, sedimentation, and suspended sediments) or were affected by underlying community compositions. We used 3 metrics (weighted abundance, abundance of highly sensitive species, and number of highly sensitive species) to derive sensitivity to these stressors and simulated the ability of these metrics to detect a range of stressor intensities. Regardless of spatial patterns of sensitivities across the sampled area, BTA distinguished differences in sensitivity to different stressors. The BTA also successfully separated differences in community composition from differences in sensitivity to stressors. Conversely, the 3 metrics differed widely in their ability to detect simulated impacts and likely reflect underlying ecological processes, suggesting that use of multiple metrics would be informative for spatial planning and allocating conservation priorities. Our results suggest BTA could be used as a first step in strategic prioritization of protected areas and as an underlying layer for spatial planning.
OI Hewitt, Judi/0000-0002-5083-9715
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0888-8892
EI 1523-1739
PD FEB
PY 2019
VL 33
IS 1
BP 142
EP 151
DI 10.1111/cobi.13181
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000455121500015
PM 29974516
ER

PT J
AU Desrosiers, M
   Usseglio-Polatera, P
   Archaimbault, V
   Larras, F
   Methot, G
   Pinel-Alloul, B
AF Desrosiers, Melanie
   Usseglio-Polatera, Philippe
   Archaimbault, Virginie
   Larras, Florian
   Methot, Ginette
   Pinel-Alloul, Bernadette
TI Assessing anthropogenic pressure in the St. Lawrence River using traits
   of benthic macroinvertebrates
SO SCIENCE OF THE TOTAL ENVIRONMENT
DT Article
DE Macroinvertebrates; Functional traits; Large river; Bioassessment;
   Stressor-specific models; Random forests
ID FRESH-WATER MACROINVERTEBRATES; LIFE-HISTORY STRATEGIES; LARGE EUROPEAN
   RIVERS; LAKE SAINT-PIERRE; SPECIES TRAITS; INVERTEBRATE TRAITS; MULTIPLE
   STRESSORS; ECOLOGICAL TRAITS; AQUATIC ECOSYSTEMS; INITIAL ASSESSMENT
AB This study aims to evaluate the anthropogenic pressure in the St. Lawrence River by assessing the relationships between chemical contamination of sediments and benthic community structure with the trait-based approach. Organic and inorganic contaminants as well as other sediment variables (sediment grain size, total organic carbon, nutrients, etc.) and benthic invertebrate assemblages were determined in 59 sites along the river. Biological and ecological traits of taxa were coded, taking into account regional dimate and ecosystem conditions. The aims of this study were to (1) describe the relationships between traits and macroinvertebrate taxa and identify homogeneous dusters of taxa with the same combinations of functional traits, (2) describe spatial patterns in traits of macroinvertebrates in the St. Lawrence River, (3) link trait-based metrics and site groups to sediment quality and (4) define a trait-based strategy for diagnosing the ecological quality of the St. Lawrence River. Seven groups of taxa sharing similar trait-category attributes were defined. Moreover, four groups of sites were identified using the 'K-mean' non-hierarchical clustering approach. The 'IndVal' method enabled us to specifically defined trait categories corresponding to site groups on the basis of their indicator value. The relative abundances of taxa from five functional groups significantly varied among site groups. For example, some indicator traits such as multivolline cycle, long life span, fixed dutches, tegumental respiration, asexual reproduction, and collector/gatherer feeding habit were associated to the most heavily polluted sites located in the Montreal harbour which showed the highest sediment concentrations in Pb. Zn and Cu. Three trait-based pressure-specific models were built, based on the random forest approach, for respectively (1) heavy metals. (2) BPCs and PAHs, and (3) TBTs occurring in the environment. These models could be applied to assess sediment quality using macroinvertebrate assemblages in a large Canadian river. (C) 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
OI Pinel-Alloul, Bernadette/0000-0002-1070-2968
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0048-9697
EI 1879-1026
PD FEB 1
PY 2019
VL 649
BP 233
EP 246
DI 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.08.267
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000446076500021
PM 30173032
ER

PT J
AU Gutierrez-Canovas, C
   Sanchez-Fernandez, D
   Canedo-Arguelles, M
   Millan, A
   Velasco, J
   Acosta, R
   Fortuno, P
   Otero, N
   Soler, A
   Bonada, N
AF Gutierrez-Canovas, Cayetano
   Sanchez-Fernandez, David
   Canedo-Arguelles, Miguel
   Millan, Andres
   Velasco, Josefa
   Acosta, Raul
   Fortuno, Pau
   Otero, Neus
   Soler, Albert
   Bonada, Nuria
TI Do all roads lead to Rome? Exploring community trajectories in response
   to anthropogenic salinization and dilution of rivers
SO PHILOSOPHICAL TRANSACTIONS OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY B-BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES
DT Article
DE aquatic insects; community assembly; functional traits; global change;
   Mediterranean rivers; osmotic stress
ID FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; WATER BEETLES; MACROINVERTEBRATE COMMUNITIES;
   SALINITY TOLERANCE; BIOLOGICAL TRAITS; STREAM; BIODIVERSITY; AUSTRALIA;
   FRAMEWORK; PATTERNS
AB Abiotic stress shapes how communities assemble and support ecological functions. However, it remains unclear whether artificially increasing or decreasing stress levels would lead to communities assembling predictably along a single axis of variation or along multiple context-dependent trajectories of change. In response to stress intensity alterations, we hypothesize that a single trajectory of change occurs when trait-based assembly prevails, while multiple trajectories of change arise when dispersal-related processes modify colonization and trait-filtering dynamics. Hem, we tested these hypotheses using aquatic macroinvertebrates from rivers exposed to gradients of natural salinity and artificially diluted or salinized ion contents. Our results showed that trait-filtering was important in driving community assembly in natural and diluted rivers, while dispersal-related processes seemed to play a relevant role in response to salinization. Salinized rivers showed novel communities with different trait composition, while natural and diluted communities exhibited similar taxonomic and trait compositional patterns along the conductivity gradient. Our findings suggest that the artificial modification of chemical stressors can result in different biological communities, depending on the direction of the change (salinization or dilution), with trait-filtering, and organism dispersal and colonization dynamics having differential roles in community assembly. The approach presented here provides both empirical and conceptual insights that can help in anticipating the ecological effects of global change, especially for those stressors with both natural and anthropogenic origins.
   This article is part of the theme issue 'Salt in freshwaters: causes, ecological consequences and future prospects'.
OI Otero, Neus/0000-0001-6553-7958; Gutierrez Canovas,
   Cayetano/0000-0002-6785-4049; Bonada, Nuria/0000-0002-2983-3335; Millan,
   Andres/0000-0003-0036-363X; Canedo-Arguelles,
   Miguel/0000-0003-3864-7451; Soler Gil, Albert/0000-0003-3140-182X
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 0962-8436
EI 1471-2970
PD JAN 21
PY 2019
VL 374
IS 1764
AR 20180009
DI 10.1098/rstb.2018.0009
SC Life Sciences & Biomedicine - Other Topics
UT WOS:000452163200008
PM 30509911
ER

PT J
AU Cao, Y
   Liu, Y
   Ndirangu, L
   Li, W
   Xian, L
   Jiang, HS
AF Cao, Yu
   Liu, Yang
   Ndirangu, Leah
   Li, Wei
   Xian, Ling
   Jiang, Hong Sheng
TI The Analysis of Leaf Traits of Elight Ottelia Populations and Their
   Potential Ecosystem Functions in Karst Freshwaters in China
SO FRONTIERS IN PLANT SCIENCE
DT Article
DE Ottelia; Crassulacean acid metabolism; bicarbonate usage; leaf traits;
   shallow freshwaters
ID NITROGEN PULSE; AQUATIC PLANT; ALISMOIDES; LIGHT; MACROPHYTES;
   PERIPHYTON; DEPTH; CO2; HYDROCHARITACEAE; AVAILABILITY
AB Submerged macrophytes play a structuring role in the shallow freshwater ecosystem by increasing the heterogeneous state in freshwaters. The macrophytes in genus Ottelia were featured for their broad leaves, which might consequently produce specialized functions that differed from other submerged species. To explore the potential ecological role of Ottelia, a field investigation was conducted on leaf traits in eight populations of Ottelia ranging from the southwestern Yunnan-Guizhou plateau to the southern Hainan island in China covering a distance of > 1,700 km. The eight populations included all the extant Ottelia species and varieties in China except the well-documented O. alismoides. Carbon-related traits [bicarbonate usage, photosynthetic characteristics, capability of Crassulacean acid metabolism (CAM)], pigment content and parameters of chlorophyll fluorescence, morphology and mass of the leaves were determined. The different populations showed distinct functional traits of mature leaves; O. acuminata var. songmingensis had the thickest and longest leaf with CaCO3 precipitation on the both sides of the leaf, and O. cordata showed putative CAM activity with the highest diel acidity changes 12.5 mu equiv g(-1) FW. Our results indicated an important role of Ottelia populations in carbon cycling as the dominant species in karst freshwaters in China.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1664-462X
PD JAN 7
PY 2019
VL 9
AR 1938
DI 10.3389/fpls.2018.01938
SC Plant Sciences
UT WOS:000454995100002
ER

PT J
AU Chen, BZ
   Smith, SL
   Wirtz, KW
AF Chen, Bingzhang
   Smith, Sherwood Lan
   Wirtz, Kai W.
TI Effect of phytoplankton size diversity on primary productivity in the
   North Pacific: trait distributions under environmental variability
SO ECOLOGY LETTERS
DT Article
DE Biodiversity; ecosystem functioning; evenness; ocean model;
   phytoplankton size
ID FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; NUTRIENT-UPTAKE; CELL-SIZE; ECOSYSTEM
   PRODUCTIVITY; BIODIVERSITY LOSS; PLANT DIVERSITY; GROWTH-RATE;
   COMMUNITIES; TEMPERATURE; MECHANISMS
AB While most biodiversity and ecosystem functioning (BEF) studies have found positive effects of species richness on productivity, it remain unclear whether similar patterns hold for marine phytoplankton with high local richness. We use the continuous trait-based modelling approach, which assumes infinite richness and represents diversity in terms of the variance of the size distribution, to investigate the effects of phytoplankton size diversity on productivity in a three-dimensional ocean circulation model driven by realistic physics forcing. We find a slightly negative effect of size diversity on primary production, which we attribute to several factors including functional trait-environment interactions, flexible stoichiometry and the saturation of productivity at low diversity levels. The benefits of trait optimisation, whereby narrow size distributions enhance productivity under relatively stable conditions, tend to dominate over those of adaptive capacity, whereby greater diversity enhances the ability of the community to respond to environmental variability.
RI Smith, S./D-2493-2012
OI Smith, S./0000-0002-2338-5893; Chen, Bingzhang/0000-0002-1573-7473
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1461-023X
EI 1461-0248
PD JAN
PY 2019
VL 22
IS 1
BP 56
EP 66
DI 10.1111/ele.13167
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000453562900005
PM 30369015
ER

PT J
AU Koch, H
   Durwald, A
   Schweder, T
   Noriega-Ortega, B
   Vidal-Melgosa, S
   Hehemann, JH
   Dittmar, T
   Freese, HM
   Becher, D
   Simon, M
   Wietz, M
AF Koch, Hanna
   Duerwald, Alexandra
   Schweder, Thomas
   Noriega-Ortega, Beatriz
   Vidal-Melgosa, Silvia
   Hehemann, Jan-Hendrik
   Dittmar, Thorsten
   Freese, Heike M.
   Becher, Doerte
   Simon, Meinhard
   Wietz, Matthias
TI Biphasic cellular adaptations and ecological implications of Alteromonas
   macleodii degrading a mixture of algal polysaccharides
SO ISME JOURNAL
DT Article
ID DISSOLVED ORGANIC-MATTER; ZOBELLIA-GALACTANIVORANS; MARINE BACTERIUM;
   BIOCHEMICAL-CHARACTERIZATION; HETEROTROPHIC BACTERIA; COMPARATIVE
   GENOMICS; UTILIZATION LOCI; BROWN-ALGAE; CARBOHYDRATE; DEGRADATION
AB Algal polysaccharides are an important bacterial nutrient source and central component of marine food webs. However, cellular and ecological aspects concerning the bacterial degradation of polysaccharide mixtures, as presumably abundant in natural habitats, are poorly understood. Here, we contextualize marine polysaccharide mixtures and their bacterial utilization in several ways using the model bacterium Alteromonas macleodii 83-1, which can degrade multiple algal polysaccharides and contributes to polysaccharide degradation in the oceans. Transcriptomic, proteomic and exometabolomic profiling revealed cellular adaptations of A. macleodii 83-1 when degrading a mix of laminarin, alginate and pectin. Strain 83-1 exhibited substrate prioritization driven by catabolite repression, with initial laminarin utilization followed by simultaneous alginate/pectin utilization. This biphasic phenotype coincided with pronounced shifts in gene expression, protein abundance and metabolite secretion, mainly involving CAZymes/polysaccharide utilization loci but also other functional traits. Distinct temporal changes in exometabolome composition, including the alginate/pectin-specific secretion of pyrroloquinoline quinone, suggest that substrate-dependent adaptations influence chemical interactions within the community. The ecological relevance of cellular adaptations was underlined by molecular evidence that common marine macroalgae, in particular Saccharin and Fucus, release mixtures of alginate and pectin-like rhamnogalacturonan. Moreover, CAZyme microdiversity and the genomic predisposition towards polysaccharide mixtures among Alteromonas spp. suggest polysaccharide-related traits as an ecophysiological factor, potentially relating to distinct 'carbohydrate utilization types' with different ecological strategies. Considering the substantial primary productivity of algae on global scales, these insights contribute to the understanding of bacteria-algae interactions and the remineralization of chemically diverse polysaccharide pools, a key step in marine carbon cycling.
OI Schweder, Thomas/0000-0002-7213-3596; Dittmar,
   Thorsten/0000-0002-3462-0107; Wietz, Matthias/0000-0002-9786-3026
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1751-7362
EI 1751-7370
PD JAN
PY 2019
VL 13
IS 1
BP 92
EP 103
DI 10.1038/s41396-018-0252-4
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Microbiology
UT WOS:000453576600008
PM 30116038
ER

PT J
AU Lavaud, R
   Jolivet, A
   Rannou, E
   Jean, F
   Strand, O
   Flye-Sainte-Marie, J
AF Lavaud, Romain
   Jolivet, Aurelie
   Rannou, Eric
   Jean, Fred
   Strand, Oivind
   Flye-Sainte-Marie, Jonathan
TI What can the shell tell about the scallop? Using growth trajectories
   along latitudinal and bathymetric gradients to reconstruct physiological
   history with DEB theory
SO JOURNAL OF SEA RESEARCH
DT Article
DE Modeling; Dynamic Energy Budget; Environmental reconstruction;
   Latitudinal gradient; Bathymetric gradient; Growth; Pecten maximus;
   Sclerochronology
ID ENERGY BUDGET MODEL; PECTEN-MAXIMUS; GREAT SCALLOP; CRASSOSTREA-GIGAS;
   FEEDING-ACTIVITY; COASTAL WATERS; BIVALVE; PHYTOPLANKTON; FOOD; SEA
AB The great scallop, Pecten maximus, presents a strong variability of growth and reproductive patterns along its spatial distribution range. Such differences in life history traits result from complex interactions between organisms and environmental conditions that can be apprehended through the study of energy dynamics. As the determination of accurate food proxy can be a limitation for modeling bioenergetic, recent work by Lavaud et al. (accepted, this issue), based on the DEB theory, provided a new approach consisting of using temperature and growth time series to reconstruct the required assimilated energy to support observed growth. In this study we present an application of this method to growth trajectories of the great scallop P. maxims used to elucidate: (1) life history traits patterns and (2) the choice of food availability proxies. The inverted DEB model was used to reconstruct the functional response (f) for different age classes of P. maximus in 10 locations of its spatial distribution range. We especially explored the patterns of reconstructed f along latitudinal and bathymetric gradients. Average reconstructed f as well as its maximum value were found to increase with latitude. The variability off, although increasing, did not show a significant relationship with the geographical position. Along the bathymetric gradient strong positive relationships were found between the mean f or its variability and depth. Ontogeny had low effect on the reconstructed f. Furthermore, as the inverted DEB model allows the reconstruction of physiological variables and energy fluxes, we explored the potential differences in reserve and maintenance fluxes dynamics from great scallops living in these contrasting environments. For one of the study sites, comparisons of f with field measurements of 11 food indicators (chlorophyll-a from the pelagic/benthic domains, phytoplankton cell counts, etc.) highlighted the complexity of the functional response and the diet of P. maximus. Pelagic or benthic phytoplankton biovolume, diatoms and dinoflagellates counts and chlorophyll-a were found to be the major contributors to the variability of f. Results suggest that although assimilation is best described by a combination of indicators, chlorophyll-a remains a good enough indicator of food availability for great scallops and bivalves in general.
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 1385-1101
EI 1873-1414
PD JAN
PY 2019
VL 143
SI SI
BP 193
EP 206
DI 10.1016/j.seares.2018.04.001
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000453497600019
ER

PT J
AU Aspin, TWH
   Khamis, K
   Matthews, TJ
   Milner, AM
   O'Callaghan, MJ
   Trimmer, M
   Woodward, G
   Ledger, ME
AF Aspin, Thomas W. H.
   Khamis, Kieran
   Matthews, Thomas J.
   Milner, Alexander M.
   O'Callaghan, Matthew J.
   Trimmer, Mark
   Woodward, Guy
   Ledger, Mark E.
TI Extreme drought pushes stream invertebrate communities over functional
   thresholds
SO GLOBAL CHANGE BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE climate change; disturbance gradient; drought; ecological threshold;
   functional traits; macroinvertebrates; stream drying
ID AQUATIC MACROINVERTEBRATES; BIOLOGICAL TRAITS;
   BENTHIC-MACROINVERTEBRATES; ECOLOGICAL THRESHOLDS; ASSEMBLAGE RESPONSES;
   TEMPORARY RIVERS; SPECIES TRAITS; LIFE-HISTORY; DISTURBANCE; RESILIENCE
AB Functional traits are increasingly being used to predict extinction risks and range shifts under long-term climate change scenarios, but have rarely been used to study vulnerability to extreme climatic events, such as supraseasonal droughts. In streams, drought intensification can cross thresholds of habitat loss, where marginal changes in environmental conditions trigger disproportionate biotic responses. However, these thresholds have been studied only from a structural perspective, and the existence of functional nonlinearity remains unknown. We explored trends in invertebrate community functional traits along a gradient of drought intensity, simulated over 18 months, using mesocosms analogous to lowland headwater streams. We modelled the responses of 16 traits based on a priori predictions of trait filtering by drought, and also examined the responses of trait profile groups (TPGs) identified via hierarchical cluster analysis. As responses to drought intensification were both linear and nonlinear, generalized additive models (GAMs) were chosen to model response curves, with the slopes of fitted splines used to detect functional thresholds during drought. Drought triggered significant responses in 12 (75%) of the a priori-selected traits. Behavioural traits describing movement (dispersal, locomotion) and diet were sensitive to moderate-intensity drought, as channels fragmented into isolated pools. By comparison, morphological and physiological traits showed little response until surface water was lost, at which point we observed sudden shifts in body size, respiration mode and thermal tolerance. Responses varied widely among TPGs, ranging from population collapses of non-aerial dispersers as channels fragmented to irruptions of small, eurythermic dietary generalists upon extreme dewatering. Our study demonstrates for the first time that relatively small changes in drought intensity can trigger disproportionately large functional shifts in stream communities, suggesting that traits-based approaches could be particularly useful for diagnosing catastrophic ecological responses to global change.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1354-1013
EI 1365-2486
PD JAN
PY 2019
VL 25
IS 1
BP 230
EP 244
DI 10.1111/gcb.14495
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000453370700019
PM 30346098
ER

PT J
AU Szabo, S
   Peeters, ETHM
   Varbiro, G
   Borics, G
   Lukacs, BA
AF Szabo, S.
   Peeters, E. T. H. M.
   Varbiro, G.
   Borics, G.
   Lukacs, B. A.
TI Phenotypic plasticity as a clue for invasion success of the submerged
   aquatic plant Elodea nuttallii
SO PLANT BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE Alien; aquatic plant; competition; light; macrophyte; nitrogen
ID FRESH-WATER MACROPHYTES; ST-JOHN; MYRIOPHYLLUM-SPICATUM; COMMUNITY
   STRUCTURE; FLOODPLAIN FRANCE; CANADENSIS MICHX.; INORGANIC CARBON;
   SPATIAL-PATTERN; GENUS ELODEA; GROWTH
AB Two closely related alien submerged aquatic plants were introduced into Europe. The new invader (Elodea nuttallii) gradually displaced E. canadensis even at sites where the latter was well established. The aim of the study was to evaluate the combined effects of environmental factors on several phenotypic characteristics of the two Elodea species, and to relate these phenotypic characteristics to the invasion success of E. nuttallii over E. canadensis. In a factorial design, Elodea plants were grown in aquaria containing five different nitrogen concentrations and incubated at five different light intensities. We used six functional traits (apical shoot RGR), total shoot RGR, relative elongation, root length, lateral spread, branching degree) to measure the environmental response of the species. We calculated plasticity indices to express the phenotypic differences between species. Light and nitrogen jointly triggered the development of phenotypic characteristics that make E. nuttallii a more successful invader in eutrophic waters than E. canadensis. The stronger invader showed a wider range of phenotypic plasticity. The apical elongation was the main difference between the two species, with E. nuttallii being more than two times longer than E. canadensis. E. canadensis formed dense side shoots even under high shade and low nitrogen levels, whereas E. nuttallii required higher light and nitrogen levels. We found that under more eutrophic conditions, E. nuttallii reach the water surface sooner than E. canadensis and through intensive branching outcompetes all other plants including E. canadensis. Our findings support the theory that more successful invaders have wider phenotypic plasticity.
OI Lukacs, Balazs Andras/0000-0002-3163-1281
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1435-8603
EI 1438-8677
PD JAN
PY 2019
VL 21
IS 1
BP 54
EP 63
DI 10.1111/plb.12918
SC Plant Sciences
UT WOS:000453080700006
PM 30253010
ER

PT J
AU Grunberg, RL
   Brianik, CJ
   Lovy, J
   Sukhdeo, MVK
AF Grunberg, Rita L.
   Brianik, Christopher J.
   Lovy, Jan
   Sukhdeo, Michael V. K.
TI Divergence in Alewife Alosa pseudoharengus (Actinopterygii, Clupeidae),
   life history alters parasite communities
SO HYDROBIOLOGIA
DT Article
DE Helminths; Life history; Anadromous; Evolutionary ecology; Migration;
   Fish
ID ENEMY RELEASE; ARCTIC CHARR; HOST; DIVERSITY; ECOLOGY; POPULATIONS;
   PREDATION; PATHOGENS; ORGANISMS; DISEASES
AB The Alewife, Alosa pseudoharengus, presently has two distinct life history variants, the anadromous ancestral type, and a derived landlocked freshwater type. In accordance with their variation in life history, landlocked Alewives have evolved dissimilar morphologies and ecological traits relative to the anadromous type, and as a result, their functional roles within ecosystems have changed. This study tests the prediction that hosts with an altered life history and ecosystem residency, like the landlocked Alewives would have lower rates of parasitism, which would result in a lower diversity and abundance of macroparasites compared to the anadromous variant. We compared parasite species richness and abundance between landlocked (collected from a lake in New Jersey) and anadromous Alewives (collected from river and ocean environments). The landlocked Alewives were infected with only 2 parasite species and overall parasite abundance was low in this population, while the anadromous Alewives harbored 7 parasite species, which formed distinct communities depending on host stage. Overall, this study suggests there was a loss of native parasites within landlocked Alewives and supports the idea that these populations of Alewives experience lower parasite pressure than their anadromous conspecifics.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0018-8158
EI 1573-5117
PD JAN
PY 2019
VL 826
IS 1
BP 307
EP 318
DI 10.1007/s10750-018-3743-4
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000450842300020
ER

PT J
AU Carlson, EA
   Cooper, DJ
   Merritt, DM
   Kondratieff, BC
   Waskom, RM
AF Carlson, Erick A.
   Cooper, David J.
   Merritt, David M.
   Kondratieff, Boris C.
   Waskom, Reagan M.
TI Irrigation canals are newly created streams of semi-arid agricultural
   regions
SO SCIENCE OF THE TOTAL ENVIRONMENT
DT Article
DE Riparian vegetation; Aquatic macroinvertebrates; Irrigation canal;
   Community ecology
ID RIPARIAN VEGETATION; DRAINAGE DITCHES; FOOD WEBS; ECOLOGICAL
   CONSEQUENCES; MACROINVERTEBRATE ASSEMBLAGES; ECOSYSTEM PROCESSES; BASIC
   PRINCIPLES; ORGANIC-MATTER; GREEN RIVER; BIODIVERSITY
AB The natural hydrologic processes that create and maintain the diversity of aquatic and riparian habitats along the World's streams and rivers have been profoundly altered by humans. Diversion of surface water to support production agriculture in arid and semi-arid regions has degraded ecosystems but also created potential habitat along and in canals specifically designed to transport water. The prevalence of canals and the immense amount of water used for agriculture have created these new artificial stream systems. This study demonstrates the potential for irrigation canals to support riparian and aquatic communities similar to natural streams in urban/residential and agricultural landscapes. We examined the hydrological and ecological characteristics of streams and irrigation canals in urban and agricultural landscapes in northeastern Colorado, typical of regions dominated by irrigation-supported agriculture. Flow patterns in canals depended on their size and had a range of patterns with potential ecological consequences such as rapidly rising and falling water stage, intermittent dry periods, and delayed peak and base flows compared to natural streams. Despite these hydrologic differences, the taxonomic and functional composition of riparian plant and aquatic macroinvertebrate communities indicated that ecological similarities exist between streams and canals, but are dependent, in part, on their landscape setting with stronger similarities in agricultural areas. We also tested the influence of characterizing taxa by functional groups using physiology, ecology and life history traits to explore attributes of habitats including woody canopy structure and water quality. We used a Habitat Quality Index (HQI) that combined physical and biological measures into a single index. Streams scored higher on average within agriculture and urban/residential settings compared to canals; however, one third of urban canals scored above the average of agricultural streams. This multidisciplinary study shows that irrigation canals can be valuable riparian and aquatic habitat, especially in regions with severely degraded streams. (C) 2018 Published by Elsevier B.V.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0048-9697
EI 1879-1026
PD JAN 1
PY 2019
VL 646
BP 770
EP 781
DI 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.07.246
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000445164800074
PM 30064103
ER

PT J
AU Breine, NT
   De Backer, A
   Van Colen, C
   Moens, T
   Hostens, K
   Van Hoey, G
AF Breine, Naomi T.
   De Backer, Annelies
   Van Colen, Carl
   Moens, Tom
   Hostens, Kris
   Van Hoey, Gert
TI Structural and functional diversity of soft-bottom macrobenthic
   communities in the Southern North Sea
SO ESTUARINE COASTAL AND SHELF SCIENCE
DT Article
DE Benthic habitat; Diversity; Biological traits; Soft-sediment
ID MARINE BENTHIC ECOSYSTEMS; EASTERN ENGLISH-CHANNEL; ABRA-ALBA COMMUNITY;
   TRAITS ANALYSIS BTA; BIOLOGICAL TRAITS; TEMPORAL VARIABILITY; SPECIES
   RICHNESS; SPATIAL-PATTERNS; BELGIAN PART; SMALL-SCALE
AB Our study presents a revision of the structural characteristics of the soft-bottom benthic communities in the Belgian Part of the North Sea (BPNS) and provides, for the first time, an insight into their functional characteristics. Compared to previous research, the dataset expanded considerably on a spatial and temporal scale (1994-2012). Five communities were identified, each with their own structural characteristics, indicator species, sediment properties and spatial distribution. The offshore area was dominated by the Hesionura elongata community (formerly Ophelia borealis), and although previously described by low diversity and abundance, this study shows that this community has the second highest sample diversity and moderate densities. Also, a new community, the Magelona-Ensis leei community, was found in very shallow water and characterized by low diversity and the dominance of the non-indigenous species E. leei. The structural characteristics and spatial distribution of the previously described Limecola balthica, Abra alba and Nephtys cirrosa community remained largely unchanged. Though structurally distinct, the communities overlap in some of their functional attributes. Analysis of biological traits revealed that in the coarser permeable sands, both the N. cirrosa and H. elongata community harbor more free living mobile individuals, causing diffusive mixing. The finer sand (A. alba, Magelona- Ensis leei) and muddy (L. balthica) communities hold more sessile, tube building and burrow dwelling species. Apart from diffusive mixing, sediment reworking in these finer sands occurs by surface deposition and downward convection. In combination with higher densities and biomass, this results in a higher bioturbation potential (BPc) for the Abra alba and Magelona-Ensis leei community. Finally, measures for functional diversity and redundancy were calculated, and were also highest in the Abra alba and Hesionura elongata community, thus demonstrating the importance of both communities for conservation purposes from a structural as well as a functional perspective. The analyses revealed that even in well-studied areas new data give new insights, with important consequences for management. Our study forms a benchmark for future ecosystem health status assessments in the framework of international and national nature management obligations such as the European Marine Strategy Framework Directive (MSFD), the Habitats Directive and the Marine Spatial Planning Directive.
OI Hostens, Kris/0000-0002-8476-1362
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0272-7714
EI 1096-0015
PD DEC 15
PY 2018
VL 214
BP 173
EP 184
DI 10.1016/j.ecss.2018.09.012
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000448098800018
ER

PT J
AU Teixido, N
   Gambi, MC
   Parravacini, V
   Kroeker, K
   Micheli, F
   Villeger, S
   Ballesteros, E
AF Teixido, Nuria
   Gambi, Maria Cristina
   Parravacini, Valeriano
   Kroeker, Kristy
   Micheli, Fiorenza
   Villeger, Sebastien
   Ballesteros, Enric
TI Functional biodiversity loss along natural CO2 gradients
SO NATURE COMMUNICATIONS
DT Article
ID OCEAN ACIDIFICATION; DIVERSITY; COMMUNITY; REDUNDANCY; CARBON; FISH;
   VULNERABILITY; REVEALS; IMPACT; CONSEQUENCES
AB The effects of environmental change on biodiversity are still poorly understood. In particular, the consequences of shifts in species composition for marine ecosystem function are largely unknown. Here we assess the loss of functional diversity, i.e. the range of species biological traits, in benthic marine communities exposed to ocean acidification (OA) by using natural CO2 vent systems. We found that functional richness is greatly reduced with acidification, and that functional loss is more pronounced than the corresponding decrease in taxonomic diversity. In acidified conditions, most organisms accounted for a few functional entities (i.e. unique combination of functional traits), resulting in low functional redundancy. These results suggest that functional richness is not buffered by functional redundancy under OA, even in highly diverse assemblages, such as rocky benthic communities.
RI Villeger, Sebastien/C-6272-2011
OI Villeger, Sebastien/0000-0002-2362-7178
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 2041-1723
PD DEC 11
PY 2018
VL 9
AR 5149
DI 10.1038/s41467-018-07592-1
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000452777600001
PM 30531929
ER

PT J
AU Tills, O
   Spicer, JI
   Grimmer, A
   Marini, S
   Jie, VW
   Tully, E
   Rundle, SD
AF Tills, Oliver
   Spicer, John I.
   Grimmer, Andrew
   Marini, Simone
   Jie, Vun Wen
   Tully, Ellen
   Rundle, Simon D.
TI A high-throughput and open-source platform for embryo phenomics
SO PLOS BIOLOGY
DT Article
ID IMAGE
AB Phenomics has the potential to facilitate significant advances in biology but requires the development of high-throughput technologies capable of generating and analysing high-dimensional data. There are significant challenges associated with building such technologies, not least those required for investigating dynamic processes such as embryonic development, during which high rates of temporal, spatial, and functional change are inherently difficult to capture. Here, we present EmbryoPhenomics, an accessible high-throughput platform for phenomics in aquatic embryos comprising an Open-source Video Microscope (OpenVIM) that produces high-resolution videos of multiple embryos under tightly controlled environmental conditions. These videos are then analysed by the Python package Embryo Computer Vision (EmbryoCV), which extracts phenomic data for morphological, physiological, behavioural, and proxy traits during the process of embryonic development. We demonstrate the broad-scale applicability of EmbryoPhenomics in a series of experiments assessing chronic, acute, and multistressor responses to environmental change (temperature and salinity) in >30 million images of >600 embryos of two species with markedly different patterns of development-the pond snail Radix balthica and the marine amphipod Orchestia gammarellus. The challenge of phenomics is significant but so too are the rewards, and it is particularly relevant to the urgent task of assessing complex organismal responses to current rates of environmental change. EmbryoPhenomics can acquire and process data capturing functional, temporal, and spatial responses in the earliest, most dynamic life stages and is potentially game changing for those interested in studying development and phenomics more widely.
OI Spicer, John/0000-0002-6861-4039
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1545-7885
PD DEC
PY 2018
VL 16
IS 12
AR e3000074
DI 10.1371/journal.pbio.3000074
SC Biochemistry & Molecular Biology; Life Sciences & Biomedicine - Other
   Topics
UT WOS:000455108400024
PM 30543636
ER

PT J
AU Baker, KG
   Radford, DT
   Evenhuis, C
   Kuzhiumparam, U
   Ralph, PJ
   Doblin, MA
AF Baker, Kirralee G.
   Radford, Dale T.
   Evenhuis, Christian
   Kuzhiumparam, Unnikrishnan
   Ralph, Peter J.
   Doblin, Martina A.
TI Thermal niche evolution of functional traits in a tropical marine
   phototroph
SO JOURNAL OF PHYCOLOGY
DT Article
DE adaptation; global warming; phytoplankton; thermal niche; thermal
   performance curves
ID PHYTOPLANKTON GROWTH; CHLOROPHYLL-A; TEMPERATURE; SYMBIODINIUM;
   ADAPTATION; LIGHT; ACID; ALGAE; MODEL; COCCOLITHOPHORE
AB Land-based plants and ocean-dwelling microbial phototrophs known as phytoplankton, are together responsible for almost all global primary production. Habitat warming associated with anthropogenic climate change has detrimentally impacted marine primary production, with the effects observed on regional and global scales. In contrast to slower-growing higher plants, there is considerable potential for phytoplankton to evolve rapidly with changing environmental conditions. The energetic constraints associated with adaptation in phytoplankton are not yet understood, but are central to forecasting how global biogeochemical cycles respond to contemporary ocean change. Here, we demonstrate a number of potential trade-offs associated with high-temperature adaptation in a tropical microbial eukaryote, Amphidinium massartii (dinoflagellate). Most notably, the population became high-temperature specialized (higher fitness within a narrower thermal envelope and higher thermal optimum), and had a greater nutrient requirement for carbon, nitrogen and phosphorus. Evidently, the energetic constraints associated with living at elevated temperature alter competiveness along other environmental gradients. While high-temperature adaptation led to an irreversible change in biochemical composition (i.e., an increase in fatty acid saturation), the mechanisms underpinning thermal evolution in phytoplankton remain unclear, and will be crucial to understanding whether the trade-offs observed here are species-specific or are representative of the evolutionary constraints in all phytoplankton.
OI Evenhuis, Christian/0000-0001-9903-7716; Baker,
   Kirralee/0000-0003-3008-2513
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0022-3646
EI 1529-8817
PD DEC
PY 2018
VL 54
IS 6
BP 799
EP 810
DI 10.1111/jpy.12759
SC Plant Sciences; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000454908500005
PM 29901841
ER

PT J
AU Griffin, JN
   Silliman, BR
AF Griffin, John N.
   Silliman, Brian R.
TI Predator size-structure and species identity determine cascading effects
   in a coastal ecosystem
SO ECOLOGY AND EVOLUTION
DT Article
DE biodiversity; ecosystem functioning; metabolic theory;
   multifunctionality; salt marsh; trophic cascade
ID TOP-DOWN CONTROL; SPARTINA-ALTERNIFLORA PRODUCTION; BODY-SIZE;
   FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; TROPHIC INTERACTIONS; FIDDLER-CRABS; BIODIVERSITY;
   POPULATION; REDUNDANCY; STRENGTH
AB Cascading consequences of predator extinctions are well documented, but impacts of perturbations to predator size-structure and how these vary across species remain unclear. Body size is hypothesized to be a key trait governing individual predators' impact on ecosystems. Therefore, shifts in predator size-structure should trigger ecosystem ramifications which are consistent across functionally similar species. Using a US salt marsh as a model system, we tested this hypothesis by manipulating size class (small, medium, and large) and size diversity (combination of all three size classes) within two closely related and functionally similar predatory crab species over 4 months. Across treatments, predators suppressed densities of a dominant grazer and an ecosystem engineer, enhanced plant biomass, and altered sediment properties (redox potential and saturation). Over the metabolically equivalent experimental predator treatments, small size class predators had stronger average impacts on response variables, and size class interacted with predator species identity to drive engineer suppression. Within both predator species, size diversity increased cannibalism and slightly weakened the average impact. These results show that predator impacts in a salt marsh ecosystem are determined by both size class and size diversity; they also highlight that size class can have species-dependent and response-dependent effects, underlining the challenge of generalizing trait effects.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 2045-7758
PD DEC
PY 2018
VL 8
IS 24
BP 12435
EP 12442
DI 10.1002/ece3.4571
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000454523500012
PM 30619556
ER

PT J
AU Frelat, R
   Orio, A
   Casini, M
   Lehmann, A
   Merigot, B
   Otto, SA
   Sguotti, C
   Mollmann, C
AF Frelat, Romain
   Orio, Alessandro
   Casini, Michele
   Lehmann, Andreas
   Merigot, Bastien
   Otto, Saskia A.
   Sguotti, Camilla
   Moellmann, Christian
TI A three-dimensional view on biodiversity changes: spatial, temporal, and
   functional perspectives on fish communities in the Baltic Sea
SO ICES JOURNAL OF MARINE SCIENCE
DT Article; Proceedings Paper
CT BONUS Symposium on Science Delivery for Sustainable Use of the Baltic
   Sea Living Resources
CY OCT, 2017
CL Tallinn, ESTONIA
DE Baltic Sea; demersal fish community; functional traits; multivariate
   analysis; spatio-temporal dynamics; species distribution
ID LONG-TERM TRENDS; CLIMATE-CHANGE; TRAIT RESPONSES; SPECIES TRAITS;
   MARINE; DIVERSITY; ECOSYSTEM; VARIABLES; ORDINATION; 4TH-CORNER
AB Fisheries and marine ecosystem-based management requires a holistic understanding of the dynamics of fish communities and their responses to changes in environmental conditions. Environmental conditions can simultaneously shape the spatial distribution and the temporal dynamics of a population, which together can trigger changes in the functional structure of communities. Here, we developed a comprehensive framework based on complementary multivariate statistical methodologies to simultaneously investigate the effects of environmental conditions on the spatial, temporal and functional dynamics of species assemblages. The framework is tested using survey data collected during more than 4000 fisheries hauls over the Baltic Sea between 2001 and 2016. The approach revealed the Baltic fish community to be structured into three sub-assemblages along a strong and temporally stable salinity gradient decreasing from West to the East. Additionally, we highlight a mismatch between species and functional richness associated with a lower functional redundancy in the Baltic Proper compared with other sub-areas, suggesting an ecosystem more susceptible to external pressures. Based on a large dataset of community data analysed in an innovative and comprehensive way, we could disentangle the effects of environmental changes on the structure of biotic communities-key information for the management and conservation of ecosystems.
OI Orio, Alessandro/0000-0002-5566-6139
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 1054-3139
EI 1095-9289
PD DEC
PY 2018
VL 75
IS 7
BP 2463
EP 2475
DI 10.1093/icesjms/fsy027
SC Fisheries; Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000454358100016
ER

PT J
AU Triay-Portella, R
   Gonzalez, JA
   Biscoito, M
   Ruiz-Diaz, R
   Pajuelo, JG
AF Triay-Portella, Raul
   Gonzalez, Jose A.
   Biscoito, Manuel
   Ruiz-Diaz, Raquel
   Pajuelo, Jose G.
TI Sex with the lights off: Can a morphological structure reveal the sex
   and functional sexual maturity in the genus Plesionika?
SO DEEP-SEA RESEARCH PART I-OCEANOGRAPHIC RESEARCH PAPERS
DT Article
DE Sexual dimorphism; Plesionika; Deep-sea pandalids; Thoracic teeth;
   Sexual maturity; Pure searchers; Secondary sexual characters
ID WATER SHRIMPS DECAPODA; CARIDEA; PANDALIDAE; ATLANTIC; GROWTH
AB The present work describes a taxonomic trait able to determine sex in pandalid shrimps of the genus Plesionika and an indicator of functional maturity in females. This structure is described as formed by two teeth with abundant setae present in all males of the nine Plesionika species examined. This morphological trait has been ignored across the taxonomy in pandalids. Thoracic teeth were located on the 7th thoracic sternite. Each species presents a characteristic trait of this structure, although P. williamsi has a particular pair of thoracic teeth compared with their congeners. This structure could be used as a tool in the systematics of this genus. Sex determination through thoracic teeth shall represent a faster alternative to the classical appendix masculina sexing method. Functional maturity of females is linked to the fading of immature thoracic teeth. The observation of living specimens in tanks has allowed for the finding that males of P. narval and P. edwardsii actively seek (search for) females and use their third pair of multi-articulate legs to locate the teeth of the thoracic region, which implicates these structures in the activity of "pure searchers" to locate mature females. Thoracic teeth open a new window to different fields of research, such as taxonomy, systematics, and sexual behaviour, and are a tool to determine the first maturity of the Plesionika species.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0967-0637
EI 1879-0119
PD DEC
PY 2018
VL 142
BP 69
EP 76
DI 10.1016/j.dsr.2018.10.005
SC Oceanography
UT WOS:000453491000006
ER

PT J
AU Demopoulos, AWJ
   Bourque, JR
   Durkin, A
   Cordes, EE
AF Demopoulos, Amanda W. J.
   Bourque, Jill R.
   Durkin, Alanna
   Cordes, Erik E.
TI The influence of seep habitats on sediment macrofaunal biodiversity and
   functional traits
SO DEEP-SEA RESEARCH PART I-OCEANOGRAPHIC RESEARCH PAPERS
DT Article
DE Cold seep; Macrofauna; Gulf of Mexico; Functional traits; Isotope
   niches; SIBER; Maxent
ID GULF-OF-MEXICO; SULFIDE-RICH SEDIMENTS; COMMUNITY STRUCTURE; COLD SEEPS;
   SPATIAL HETEROGENEITY; BIOLOGICAL TRAITS; LOPHELIA-PERTUSA; METHANE
   SEEPS; DEEP GULF; SEA
AB Chemosynthetic ecosystems in the Gulf of Mexico (GOM) support dense communities of seep megafaunal invertebrates that rely on endosymbiotic bacteria for nutrition. Distinct infaunal communities are associated with the biogenic habitats created by seep biota, where habitat heterogeneity and sediment geochemistry influence local macrofaunal community structure. Here we examine the community structure and function of seep in faunal communities in the GOM in relation to environmental drivers and estimated proximity to seeps. We modeled seep distribution within 3 major seep fields (AC601, GC852, and AT340), and examined the influence of proximity to seep and associated sediment environment on infaunal community structure and function. To model seep habitat distribution, we used known seep occurrence data from ROV and towed camera images, terrain variables derived from high resolution multibeam bathymetry (gridded to 3 m resolution), and a maximum entropy (Maxent) approach. Model performance was high, with mean area under the curve for each habitat ranging from 0.851 for mussel to 0.908 for tubeworm habitat, with the models highly influenced by terrain rugosity. Replicate sediment cores were collected from the three sites in 2007 and processed for macrofauna and environmental characteristics. A majority of the taxa (86%) occurred within 16 m of modeled seep habitat and increased distance from modeled seeps was generally associated with lower calculated seep index coupled with decreased macrofaunal densities. Distance-based linear regression indicated that patterns in macrofaunal communities were driven by proximity to modeled seep habitat and profile curvature, a metric for the shape of the maximum slope. Similarly, variance in infaunal functional traits was best explained by proximity to seep, but also sediment C:N, reflecting the relative influence of sediment chemistry, including organic content, on infaunal communities. Results suggest that northern GOM seep infaunal community assemblages and their function are structured by factors that influence food availability and habitat heterogeneity. Given the abundance of seeps in the GOM and in the world's oceans, this study supports the premise that the sphere of influence of seeps is spatially extensive.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0967-0637
EI 1879-0119
PD DEC
PY 2018
VL 142
BP 77
EP 93
DI 10.1016/j.dsr.2018.10.004
SC Oceanography
UT WOS:000453491000007
ER

PT J
AU Rahel, FJ
   McLaughlin, RL
AF Rahel, Frank J.
   McLaughlin, Robert L.
TI Selective fragmentation and the management of fish movement across
   anthropogenic barriers
SO ECOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS
DT Article
DE barriers; dispersal; fish migration; fishway; habitat fragmentation;
   invasive species; selective fish passage
ID LAMPREY PETROMYZON-MARINUS; VERTICAL-SLOT FISHWAY; STROBE LIGHT BARRIER;
   SWIMMING PERFORMANCE; CARBON-DIOXIDE; BIGHEAD CARP; COMMON CARP; PASSAGE
   FACILITIES; ATLANTIC SALMON; CYPRINUS-CARPIO
AB Disruption of movement patterns due to alterations in habitat connectivity is a pervasive effect of humans on animal populations. In many terrestrial and aquatic systems, there is increasing tension between the need to simultaneously allow passage of some species while blocking the passage of other species. We explore the ecological basis for selective fragmentation of riverine systems where the need to restrict movements of invasive species conflicts with the need to allow passage of species of commercial, recreational, or conservation concern. We develop a trait-based framework for selective fish passage based on understanding the types of movements displayed by fishes and the role of ecological filters in determining the spatial distributions of fishes. We then synthesize information on trait-based mechanisms involved with these filters to create a multidimensional niche space based on attributes such as physical capabilities, body morphology, sensory capabilities, behavior, and movement phenology. Following this, we review how these mechanisms have been applied to achieve selective fish passage across anthropogenic barriers. To date, trap-and-sort or capture-translocation efforts provide the best options for movement filters that are completely species selective, but these methods are hampered by the continual, high cost of manual sorting. Other less effective methods of selective passage risk collateral damage in the form of lower or higher than desired levels of passage. Fruitful areas for future work include using combinations of ecological and behavioral traits to passively segregate species; using taxon-specific chemical or auditory cues to direct unwanted species away from passageways and into physical or ecological traps while attracting desirable species to passageways; and developing automated sorting mechanisms based on fish recognition systems. The trait-based approach proposed for fish could serve as a template for selective fragmentation in other ecological systems.
OI Rahel, Frank/0000-0002-0932-3485
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1051-0761
EI 1939-5582
PD DEC
PY 2018
VL 28
IS 8
BP 2066
EP 2081
DI 10.1002/eap.1795
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000451913200011
PM 30168645
ER

PT J
AU Grimstead, JP
   Krynak, EM
   Yates, AG
AF Grimstead, Jeremy P.
   Krynak, Edward M.
   Yates, Adam G.
TI Scale-specific land cover thresholds for conservation of stream
   invertebrate communities in agricultural landscapes
SO LANDSCAPE ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE Agriculture; Benthic macroinvertebrates; Catchment; Riparian corridor;
   Scale-specific effects; Threshold analysis
ID WATER-QUALITY; AQUATIC INVERTEBRATES; ECOLOGICAL THRESHOLDS; RIPARIAN;
   MANAGEMENT; RESPONSES; ASSEMBLAGES; HABITAT; FISH
AB ContextIn agricultural landscapes, riparian forests are used as a management tool to protect stream ecosystems from agricultural activities. However, the ability of managers to target stream protection actions is limited by incomplete knowledge of scale-specific effects of agriculture in riparian corridor and catchment areas.ObjectivesWe evaluated scale-specific effects of agricultural cover in riparian corridor and catchment areas on stream benthic macroinvertebrate (BMI) communities to develop cover targets for agricultural landscapes.MethodsSixty-eight streams assigned to three experimental treatments (Forested Riparian, Agricultural Riparian, Agricultural Catchment) were sampled for BMIs. Ordination and segmented regression were used to assess impacts of agriculture on BMI communities and detect thresholds for BMI community metrics.ResultsBMI communities were not associated with catchment agricultural cover where the riparian corridor was forested, but were associated with variation in catchment agriculture where riparian forests had been converted to agriculture. Trait-based metrics showed threshold responses at greater than 70% agricultural cover in the catchment. Increasing agriculture in the riparian corridor was associated with less diverse and more tolerant BMI communities. Eight metrics exhibited threshold responses ranging from 45 to 75% agriculture in the riparian corridor.ConclusionsRiparian forest effectively buffered streams from agricultural activity even where catchment agriculture exceeds 80%. We recommend managers prioritize protection of forested riparian corridors and that restore riparian corridors where agricultural cover is near identified thresholds be a secondary priority. Adoption of catchment management actions should be effective where the riparian corridor has been converted to agriculture.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0921-2973
EI 1572-9761
PD DEC
PY 2018
VL 33
IS 12
BP 2239
EP 2252
DI 10.1007/s10980-018-0738-5
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Physical Geography; Geology
UT WOS:000451749800013
ER

PT J
AU Rocha, MP
   Bini, LM
   Domisch, S
   Tolonen, KT
   Jyrkankallio-Mikkola, J
   Soininen, J
   Hjort, J
   Heino, J
AF Rocha, Mariana Perez
   Bini, Luis M.
   Domisch, Sami
   Tolonen, Kimmo T.
   Jyrkankallio-Mikkola, Jenny
   Soininen, Janne
   Hjort, Jan
   Heino, Jani
TI Local environment and space drive multiple facets of stream
   macroinvertebrate beta diversity
SO JOURNAL OF BIOGEOGRAPHY
DT Article
DE beta diversity components; biodiversity facets; multilevel variables;
   phylogeny; species; traits
ID COMMUNITY ECOLOGY; SUBSTRATE HETEROGENEITY; TRAIT COMPOSITION; SPECIES
   TRAITS; PATTERNS; SCALE; LANDSCAPE; ASSEMBLAGES; RICHNESS; VARIABILITY
AB Aim Understanding variation in biodiversity typically requires consideration of factors operating at different spatial scales. Recently, ecologists and biogeographers have recognized the need of analysing ecological communities in the light of multiple facets including not only species-level information but also functional and phylogenetic approaches to improve our understanding of the relative contribution of processes shaping biodiversity. Here, our aim was to disentangle the relative importance of environmental variables measured at multiple levels (i.e., local, catchment, climate, and spatial variables) influencing variation in macroinvertebrate beta diversity facets (i.e., species, traits, and phylogeny) and their components (i.e., replacement and abundance difference) in boreal streams. Taxon Location Aquatic macroinvertebrates Western Finland Methods Results A total of 105 streams were sampled in western Finland, encompassing a geographical extent over 500 km. We analysed variation in the different beta diversity facets and components using distance-based redundancy analysis and associated variation partitioning procedures. We modelled spatial structures using distance-based Moran eigenvector maps. We found that the relative influence of explanatory variables on each diversity facet and component revealed relatively similar patterns. Our main finding was that local environmental and spatial variables generally contributed most to the total explained variability in all facets and components of beta diversity, whereas catchment and climate variables explained less variation in the beta diversity facets at the spatial scale considered in this study. Main conclusions Different facets of beta diversity were mainly influenced by local environmental variables and spatial structuring, likely acting through deterministic and stochastic pathways respectively. Identifying the ecological variables and mechanisms that drive variation in beta diversity may be used to guide the conservation and restoration efforts for biodiversity under global change.
OI Soininen, Janne/0000-0002-8583-3137; Perez Rocha,
   Mariana/0000-0002-9057-9049; Jyrkankallio-Mikkola,
   Jenny/0000-0002-0340-6001
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0305-0270
EI 1365-2699
PD DEC
PY 2018
VL 45
IS 12
BP 2744
EP 2754
DI 10.1111/jbi.13457
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Physical Geography
UT WOS:000451692100012
ER

PT J
AU Barraquand, F
   Picoche, C
   Maurer, D
   Carassou, L
   Auby, I
AF Barraquand, F.
   Picoche, C.
   Maurer, D.
   Carassou, L.
   Auby, I.
TI Coastal phytoplankton community dynamics and coexistence driven by
   intragroup density-dependence, light and hydrodynamics
SO OIKOS
DT Article
DE competition; diatoms; dinoflagellates; hydrodynamics; interactions; MAR;
   mutualism; network; population dynamics; seasonality; time series
ID TIME-SERIES; INTERANNUAL VARIABILITY; APPARENT COMPETITION;
   POPULATION-DYNAMICS; SPECIES COEXISTENCE; FUNCTIONAL TRAITS; ARCACHON
   BAY; FOOD-WEB; PLANKTON; MARINE
AB Phytoplanktonic communities maintain a high diversity in a seemingly homogeneous environment, competing for the same set of resources. Many theories have been proposed to explain this coexistence despite likely competition, such as contrasted responses to temporal environmental variation. However, theory has developed at a faster pace than empirical evaluation using field data, which requires inferring drivers of community dynamics from observational time series. Here, we combine autoregressive models with a data set spanning more than 20 years of phytoplankton counts every two weeks, together with nutrients and physical variables. By comparing models dominated by nutrients or physical variables (hydrodynamics and climate), we first explore which abiotic factors contribute more to phytoplankton growth and decline. We find that physical drivers - such as irradiance, wind, and salinity - explain some of the variability in abundances unexplained by biotic interactions. In contrast, responses to nutrients explain less of the phytoplankton variability. Concerning biotic drivers of community dynamics, multivariate autoregressive models reveal that competition between different groups (genera) has a much weaker effect on population growth rates than competition within a group. In fact, the few biotic interactions between genera that are detected are frequently positive. Hence, our system is unlikely to be best represented as a set of competitors whose differing responses to fluctuating environments allow coexistence, as in 'paradox of the plankton' models with a storage effect or a relative nonlinearity of competition. Coexistence is more likely to result from high intragroup density-dependence. Competition between phytoplanktonic groups and nutrient limitation are often invoked as drivers of phytoplankton dynamics; our findings suggest instead that more attention should be given to the physical structure of the environment and natural enemies such as grazers and pathogens, that could explain the high intraspecific density dependence found here.
OI Barraquand, Frederic/0000-0002-4759-0269
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0030-1299
EI 1600-0706
PD DEC
PY 2018
VL 127
IS 12
BP 1834
EP 1852
DI 10.1111/oik.05361
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000451851200012
ER

PT J
AU Hossain, MA
   Lahoz-Monfort, JJ
   Burgman, MA
   Bohm, M
   Kujala, H
   Bland, LM
AF Hossain, Md Anwar
   Lahoz-Monfort, Jose J.
   Burgman, Mark A.
   Bohm, Monika
   Kujala, Heini
   Bland, Lucie M.
TI Assessing the vulnerability of freshwater crayfish to climate change
SO DIVERSITY AND DISTRIBUTIONS
DT Article
DE adaptive capacity; climate change; exposure; freshwater biodiversity;
   freshwater crayfish; sensitivity; traits; vulnerability
ID EXTINCTION RISK; DECAPODA PARASTACIDAE; LIFE-HISTORY; CONSERVATION;
   BIODIVERSITY; CLASSIFICATION; DIVERSITY; AUSTRALIA; KNOWLEDGE; THREATS
AB Aim Climate change is a major threat to the persistence of biodiversity. Global assessments highlight the most climate vulnerable species and geographic regions based on species traits and measures of exposure to climate change. Yet the majority of climate change vulnerability assessments have focused on terrestrial and marine vertebrates and largely ignored the less well-known freshwater species and invertebrates. We present the first global analysis of 574 species of freshwater crayfish (Families: Astacidae, Parastacidae and Cambaridae) using IUCN's trait-based vulnerability assessment protocol. Location Methods Global. We collected species-specific information on sensitivity (eight traits), adaptive capacity (four traits) and exposure (five traits) to climate change and combined those dimensions to assess overall species vulnerability. Results Main conclusions Our results predicted that 87% of freshwater crayfish species are highly sensitive to climate change (primarily due to habitat specialization), 35% have low adaptive capacity and 57% are highly exposed (based on an ensemble mean of four general circulation models for a moderate Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) scenario, RCP6.0). Combining sensitivity, low adaptive capacity and exposure, we assessed 87 species (15%) as vulnerable to climate change. These species are distributed globally with high concentrations in the south-eastern USA (36 species), south-eastern Australia (21 species) and Mexico (10 species), reflecting global patterns of crayfish species richness. Of the 91 species listed as threatened by climate change in the IUCN Red List, we predicted 18 species to be climate change vulnerable. We identified hotspots of species vulnerable to climate change that require further conservation attention. The IUCN trait-based protocol can help identify data gaps and key traits that should be investigated further and thus can help overcome knowledge shortfalls on the effects of climate change. Our study provides key insights for the application of climate change vulnerability assessment to data-poor invertebrates, which remain underrepresented in global conservation priorities.
OI Lahoz-Monfort, Jose Joaquin/0000-0002-0845-7035
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1366-9516
EI 1472-4642
PD DEC
PY 2018
VL 24
IS 12
BP 1830
EP 1843
DI 10.1111/ddi.12831
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000450303700009
ER

PT J
AU Redondo, MA
   Boberg, J
   Stenlid, J
   Oliva, J
AF Redondo, Miguel A.
   Boberg, Johanna
   Stenlid, Jan
   Oliva, Jonas
TI Contrasting distribution patterns between aquatic and terrestrial
   Phytophthora species along a climatic gradient are linked to functional
   traits
SO ISME JOURNAL
DT Article
ID NATURAL ECOSYSTEMS; WESTERN-AUSTRALIA; DIVERSITY; COMMUNITY; PLANT;
   TEMPERATURE; CINNAMOMI; PATHOGEN; RAMORUM; OREGON
AB Diversity of microbial organisms is linked to global climatic gradients. The genus Phytophthora includes both aquatic and terrestrial plant pathogenic species that display a large variation of functional traits. The extent to which the physical environment (water or soil) modulates the interaction of microorganisms with climate is unknown. Here, we explored the main environmental drivers of diversity and functional trait composition of Phytophthora communities. Communities were obtained by a novel metabarcoding setup based on PacBio sequencing of river filtrates in 96 river sites along a geographical gradient. Species were classified as terrestrial or aquatic based on their phylogenetic Glade. Overall, terrestrial and aquatic species showed contrasting patterns of diversity. For terrestrial species, precipitation was a stronger driver than temperature, and diversity and functional diversity decreased with decreasing temperature and precipitation. In cold and dry areas, the dominant species formed resistant structures and had a low optimum temperature. By contrast, for aquatic species, temperature and water chemistry were the strongest drivers, and diversity increased with decreasing temperature and precipitation. Within the same area, environmental filtering affected terrestrial species more strongly than aquatic species (20% versus 3% of the studied communities, respectively). Our results highlight the importance of functional traits and the physical environment in which microorganisms develop their life cycle when predicting their distribution under changing climatic conditions. Temperature and rainfall may be buffered differently by water and soil, and thus pose contrasting constrains to microbial assemblies.
RI Oliva, Jonas/S-1033-2018
OI Oliva, Jonas/0000-0003-2418-2542; REDONDO REDONDO, MIGUEL
   ANGEL/0000-0002-6383-5457; Stenlid, Jan/0000-0002-5344-2094
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 1751-7362
EI 1751-7370
PD DEC
PY 2018
VL 12
IS 12
BP 2967
EP 2980
DI 10.1038/s41396-018-0229-3
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Microbiology
UT WOS:000450781600013
PM 30072746
ER

PT J
AU Fell, SC
   Carrivick, JL
   Kelly, MG
   Fureder, L
   Brown, LE
AF Fell, Sarah C.
   Carrivick, Jonathan L.
   Kelly, Martyn G.
   Fuereder, Leopold
   Brown, Lee E.
TI Declining glacier cover threatens the biodiversity of alpine river
   diatom assemblages
SO GLOBAL CHANGE BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE algae; alps; climate change; diatom; glacier retreat; mountain rivers
ID STREAM PERIPHYTON; FUNCTIONAL TRAITS; BENTHIC DIATOMS; CLIMATE-CHANGE;
   ALPS; ECOSYSTEM; ECOLOGY; INVERTEBRATES; SYSTEMS; HABITAT
AB Climate change poses a considerable threat to the biodiversity of high altitude ecosystems worldwide, including cold-water river systems that are responding rapidly to a shrinking cryosphere. Most recent research has demonstrated the severe vulnerability of river invertebrates to glacier retreat but effects upon other aquatic groups remain poorly quantified. Using new data sets from the European Alps, we show significant responses to declining glacier cover for diatoms, which play a critical functional role as freshwater primary producers. Specifically, diatom alpha-diversity and density in rivers presently fed by glaciers will increase with future deglaciation, yet beta-diversity within and between sites will reduce because declining glacier influence will lower the spatiotemporal variability of glacier cover and its associated habitat heterogeneity. Changes in diatom assemblage composition as glacier cover declined were associated strongly with increasing riverbed stability and water temperature. At the species level, diatoms showed a gradation of responses; for example, Eunotia trinacria, found exclusively at river sites with high (>= 52%) catchment glacier cover, may be affected negatively by ice loss. Conversely, seven taxa confined to sites with no glacier cover, including Gomphonema calcareum, stand to benefit. Nineteen (22%) taxa were noted as threatened, endangered, rare or decreasing on the Red List of Algae for Germany, with most at sites <= 26% glacier cover, meaning further ice loss may benefit these diatoms. However, six taxa found only in rivers >= 28% glacier cover may require reclassification of their Red List conservation status, as this habitat is threatened by deglaciation. Our identification of clear links between decreasing glacier cover and river diatom biodiversity suggests there could be significant reorganization of river ecosystems with deglaciation, for example, through alterations to primary production, biogeochemical cycles, and the shifting resource base of alpine freshwater food webs which lack significant allochthonous energy inputs.
OI Fell, Sarah/0000-0001-5753-276X
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1354-1013
EI 1365-2486
PD DEC
PY 2018
VL 24
IS 12
BP 5828
EP 5840
DI 10.1111/gcb.14454
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000449650600019
PM 30230660
ER

PT J
AU Teittinen, A
   Weckstrom, J
   Soininen, J
AF Teittinen, Anette
   Weckstrom, Jan
   Soininen, Janne
TI Cell size and acid tolerance constrain pond diatom distributions in the
   subarctic
SO FRESHWATER BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE body size; elevational gradient; niche characteristics; species traits;
   subarctic
ID NICHE BREADTH; REGIONAL OCCUPANCY; ELEVATIONAL PATTERNS; FUNCTIONAL
   DIVERSITY; ECOLOGICAL GUILDS; LOCAL ABUNDANCE; RANGE SIZE; BODY-SIZE;
   LAKES; DISPERSAL
AB Niche characteristics and traits affect species distributions. However, their effects on the distribution of microorganisms remain understudied, especially in subarctic regions. Our aim was to determine the effects of species niche characteristics and traits on benthic diatom (Bacillariophyceae) elevational distributions, and to identify the key drivers of trait diversity across climate-sensitive subarctic ponds. We sampled 102 ponds along an elevational gradient of 10 to 1,038 m a.s.l. in subarctic Finland and Norway. We calculated the niche characteristics by Outlying Mean Index analysis using an independent data set collected from 141 lakes in northern Fennoscandia. We ran generalised linear models to identify traits most strongly affecting the distribution of individual species, and used a functional dispersion metric to explore trait diversity at community level. Benthic diatom distributions correlated positively with niche breadth, implying that generalists were more widely distributed than specialists, but negatively with niche position, suggesting that marginal species had narrow distributions. Cell size and acid tolerance were the key traits affecting diatom distributions: small size and strong acid tolerance were associated with a wider distribution. Local abiotic variables were more important than elevation in shaping trait diversity, which increased with pH and decreased with conductivity. Several acidic wetland ponds located at low elevations exhibited functionally clustered communities, reflecting stressful conditions that comprised a filter that selected acid-tolerant species. Our results suggest that benthic diatom distributions across subarctic ponds are jointly driven by species cell size and tolerance towards water chemistry variables, especially acidity. Although elevation summarises the effects of several environmental factors, local abiotic variables were more strongly associated with trait diversity than were elevation effects. Our findings provide new insights into the key mechanisms associated with aquatic microbial distributions in highly sensitive climatic regions.
OI Soininen, Janne/0000-0002-8583-3137; Weckstrom, Jan/0000-0001-5604-617X
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0046-5070
EI 1365-2427
PD DEC
PY 2018
VL 63
IS 12
BP 1569
EP 1578
DI 10.1111/fwb.13186
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000450068500008
ER

PT J
AU Smith, DAE
   Si, XF
   Smith, YCE
   Downs, CT
AF Smith, David A. Ehlers
   Si, Xingfeng
   Smith, Yvette C. Ehlers
   Downs, Colleen T.
TI Seasonal variation in avian diversity and tolerance by migratory forest
   specialists of the patch-isolation gradient across a fragmented forest
   system
SO BIODIVERSITY AND CONSERVATION
DT Article
DE Avian dispersal; Avian guilds; Ecosystem functioning; Functional
   diversity; Landscape Ecology; Sedentary species
ID SPECIES RICHNESS; FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; HABITAT FRAGMENTATION; MOVEMENT
   PATTERNS; SEED-DISPERSAL; BIRD MIGRATION; LANDSCAPE; COMMUNITY;
   INTENSIFICATION; DISTRIBUTIONS
AB Forest-habitat loss and fragmentation reduce connectivity, presenting dispersal challenges for many forest-dependent species with deleterious effects on community structure and diversity. It is expected that avian forest specialists are vulnerable to fragmentation, yet seasonal migrants may be more resilient to isolation effects than sedentary specialists. We surveyed bird communities in 138 habitat patches of the critically endangered Indian Ocean Coastal Belt, South Africa, across a range of isolation distances from mainland forests during the breeding and non-breeding seasons. We quantified taxonomic and functional diversity per patch based on species' traits and performed 26 generalized linear mixed-effects models on the effects of isolation and the amount of habitat in the surrounding matrix on avian trait-diversity measurements. We compared diversity measures between seasons for evidence of resilience to isolation effects for migrants and compared linear regressions of isolation-distance effects to segmented regressions at various isolation distances to explore dispersal limits of sedentary forest specialists. All avian diversity measures were higher during the breeding season. The amount of surrounding habitat was a positive driver of all diversity measures. Isolation-distance effects had the most negative effect during the breeding season, and on sedentary forest specialists, which were unable to disperse across isolation distances >500m. Sedentary forest specialists are a conservation priority given (a) their value in perpetuating ecosystem services and (b) their vulnerability to isolation effects. Migratory forest specialists exhibited resilience to the isolation effect during non-breeding; thus, certain specialized niches may be occupied given the vagility of migratory forest specialists.
RI Downs, Colleen/A-7770-2010
OI Downs, Colleen/0000-0001-8334-1510; Ehlers Smith,
   David/0000-0002-6357-0751
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0960-3115
EI 1572-9710
PD DEC
PY 2018
VL 27
IS 14
BP 3707
EP 3727
DI 10.1007/s10531-018-1622-y
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000449112700008
ER

PT J
AU Shaffer, JA
   Munsch, S
   Juanes, F
AF Shaffer, J. Anne
   Munsch, Stuart
   Juanes, Francis
TI Functional diversity responses of a nearshore fish community to
   restoration driven by large-scale dam removal
SO ESTUARINE COASTAL AND SHELF SCIENCE
DT Article
DE Coastal; Sediment; Ecosystem; Ecology
ID RIVER ESTUARY PRIOR; ELWHA RIVER; MULTIPLE TRAITS; WASHINGTON;
   REDUNDANCY; COASTAL; SALMON
AB Large scale dams have numerous significant impacts on river and nearshore components of watersheds. Large scale dam removal is therefore an increasingly useful restoration tool that reestablishes physical processes and habitats that form nearshore ecosystems. Removing large scale dams will likely affect the functional ecology of nearshore ecosystems, but this concept has yet to be explored. Here we use data from a decade long study to define how the functional ecology of fish responded to large scale dam removal. Dam removal resulted in shifts in the nearshore through the reconnection of riverine and marine hydrodynamic system, large-scale and rapid creation of nearshore habitats, and a shift in nearshore habitats from tidally influenced to non-tidally influenced habitats. The functional diversity of the fish community within the system restored by dam removal was volatile during and after dam removal. Dam removal released sediment that formed new lower river and estuary. These new nearshore habitats supported a fish community of significantly greater functional dispersion and entropy relative to previously present beaches within and outside the new delta. That is, species unique in their diet, habitat use, morphology, and size were abundant relative to less functionally unique fish in newly formed beaches. These trends were temporary as there were no significant differences in functional diversity or entropy of fishes among sites after the restoration. Newly formed habitats proved to be more diverse but had lower resiliency after dam removal. Newly establishing nearshore sites appear more vulnerable to non-native and nuisance species that could disrupt the establishment of the watershed and shoreline. While functional richness at the original estuary sites dropped dramatically after dam removal, resiliency was higher after dam removal corresponding to a shift from estuary to lower river side channel habitat, indicating a more stable nearshore zone than new sites. We anticipate that functional diversity at the newly formed nearshore areas will stabilize as the habitats are vegetated and mature.
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0272-7714
EI 1096-0015
PD NOV 30
PY 2018
VL 213
BP 245
EP 252
DI 10.1016/j.ecss.2018.08.030
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000447544500022
ER

PT J
AU Herrera, Y
   Leardi, JM
   Fernandez, MS
AF Herrera, Yanina
   Martin Leardi, Juan
   Fernandez, Marta S.
TI Braincase and endocranial anatomy of two thalattosuchian crocodylomorphs
   and their relevance in understanding their adaptations to the marine
   environment
SO PEERJ
DT Article
DE Thalattosuchia; Crocodylomorpha; X-ray CT scanning; Metriorhynchidae;
   Teleosauridae; Braincase; Neuroanatomy; Mesozoic
ID CROCODYLIFORM BRAINCASE; PHYLOGENETIC POSITION; SKULL ANATOMY;
   EVOLUTION; ORIGIN; CRICOSAURUS; REVISION; REPTILES; REGION
AB Thalattosuchians are a group of Mesozoic crocodylomorphs known from aquatic deposits of the Early Jurassic-Early Cretaceous that comprises two main lineages of almost exclusively marine forms, Teleosauridae and Metriorhynchoidea. Teleosaurids were found in shallow marine, brackish and freshwater deposits, and have been characterized as semiaquatic near-shore forms, whereas metriorhynchids are a lineage of fully pelagic forms, supported by a large set of morphological characters of the skull and postcranial anatomy. Recent contributions on Thalattosuchia have been focused on the study of the endocranial anatomy. This newly available information provides novel evidence to suggest adaptations on the neuroanatomy, senses organs, vasculature, and behavioral evolution of these crocodylomorphs. However, is still not clear if the major morphological differences between teleosaurids and metriorhynchids were also mirrored by changes in the braincase and endocranial anatomy. Based on X-ray CT scanning and digital endocast reconstructions we describe the braincase and endocranial anatomy of two well-preserved specimens of Thalattosuchia, the semiaquatic teleosaurid Steneosaurus bollensis and the pelagic metriorhynchid Cricosaurus araucanensis. We propose that some morphological traits, such as: an enlarged foramen for the internal carotid artery, a carotid foramen ventral to the occipital condyle, a single CN XII foramen, absence of brain flexures, well-developed cephalic vascular system, lack of subtympanic foramina and the reduction of the paratympanic sinus system, are distinctive features of Thalattosuchia. It has been previously suggested that the enlarged foramen for the internal carotid artery, the absence of brain flexures, and the hypertrophied cephalic vascular system were synapomorphies of Metriorhynchidae; however, new information revealed that all of these features were already established at the base of Thalattosuchia and might have been exapted later on their evolutionary history. Also, we recognized some differences within Thalattosuchia that previously have not been received attention or even were overlooked (e.g., circular/bilobate trigeminal foramen, single/double CN XII foramen, separation of the cranioquadrate canal from the external otic aperture, absence/presence of lateral pharyngeal foramen). The functional significances of these traits are still unclear. Extending the sampling to other Thalattosuchia will help to test the timing of acquisition and distribution of these morphological modifications among the whole lineage. Also comparison with extant marine tetrapods (including physiological information) will be crucial to understand if some (and/or which) of the morphological peculiarities of thalattosuchian braincases are products of directional natural selection resulting in a fully adaptation to a nektonic life style.
OI Fernandez, Marta/0000-0001-6935-7575
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 2167-8359
PD NOV 26
PY 2018
VL 6
AR e5686
DI 10.7717/peerj.5686
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000452452600001
PM 30515353
ER

PT J
AU Aune, M
   Aschan, MM
   Greenacre, M
   Dolgov, AV
   Fossheim, M
   Primicerio, R
AF Aune, Magnus
   Aschan, Michaela M.
   Greenacre, Michael
   Dolgov, Andrey, V
   Fossheim, Maria
   Primicerio, Raul
TI Functional roles and redundancy of demersal Barents Sea fish: Ecological
   implications of environmental change
SO PLOS ONE
DT Article
ID CLIMATE-CHANGE; DIVERSITY; SHIFTS; COD; RESILIENCE; CHALLENGES;
   ATLANTIC; DIET
AB When facing environmental change and intensified anthropogenic impact on marine ecosystems, extensive knowledge of how these systems are functioning is required in order to manage them properly. However, in high-latitude ecosystems, where climate change is expected to have substantial ecological impact, the ecosystem functions of biological species have received little attention, partly due to the limited biological knowledge of Arctic species. Functional traits address the ecosystem functions of member species, allowing the functionality of communities to be characterised and the degree of functional redundancy to be assessed. Ecosystems with higher functional redundancy are expected to be less affected by species loss, and therefore less sensitive to disturbance. Here we highlight and compare typical functional characteristics of Arctic and boreal fish in the Barents Sea and address the consequences of a community-wide reorganization driven by climate warming on functional redundancy and characterization. Based on trait and fish community composition data, we assessed functional redundancy of the Barents Sea fish community for the period 2004-2012, a period during which this northern region was characterized by rapidly warming water masses and declining sea ice coverage. We identified six functional groups, with distinct spatial distributions, that collectively provide a functional characterization of Barents Sea fish. The functional groups displayed different prevalence in boreal and Arctic water masses. Some functional groups displayed a spatial expansion towards the northeast during the study period, whereas other groups showed a general decline in functional redundancy. Presently, the observed patterns of functional redundancy would seem to provide sufficient scope for buffering against local loss in functional diversity only for the more speciose functional groups. Furthermore, the observed functional reconfiguration may affect future ecosystem functioning in the area. In a period of rapid environmental change, monitoring programs integrating functional traits will help inform management on ecosystem functioning and vulnerability.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1932-6203
PD NOV 21
PY 2018
VL 13
IS 11
AR e0207451
DI 10.1371/journal.pone.0207451
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000451054800058
PM 30462696
ER

PT J
AU McLean, M
   Mouillot, D
   Lindegren, M
   Engelhard, G
   Villeger, S
   Marchal, P
   Brind'Amour, A
   Auber, A
AF McLean, Matthew
   Mouillot, David
   Lindegren, Martin
   Engelhard, Georg
   Villeger, Sebastien
   Marchal, Paul
   Brind'Amour, Anik
   Auber, Arnaud
TI A Climate-Driven Functional Inversion of Connected Marine Ecosystems
SO CURRENT BIOLOGY
DT Article
ID WORLD FISHERIES; FISH COMMUNITY; LIFE-HISTORY; FOOD WEBS; EL-NINO;
   TRAITS; ATLANTIC; SCALE; SHIFT
AB Sustainably managing natural resources under climate change requires understanding how species distribution shifts can impact ecosystem structure and functioning. While numerous studies have documented changes in species' distributions and abundances in response to warming [1, 2], the consequences for the functional structure of ecosystems (i.e., composition of species' functional traits) have received less attention. Here, using thirty years of fish monitoring, we show that two connected North Atlantic ecosystems (E. English Channel and S. North Sea) underwent a rapid shift in functional structure triggered by a climate oscillation to a prevailing warm-phase in the late-1990s. Using time-lag-based causality analyses, we found that rapid warming drove pelagic fishes with r-selected life history traits (e.g., low age and size at maturity, small offspring, low trophic level) to shift abruptly northward from one ecosystem to the other, causing an inversion in functional structure between the two connected ecosystems. While we observed only a one-year time-lag between the climate oscillation and the functional shift, indicating rapid responses to a changing environment, historical overfishing likely rendered these ecosystems susceptible to climatic stress [3], and declining fishing in the North Sea may have exacerbated the shift. This shift likely had major consequences for ecosystem functioning due to potential changes in biomass turnover, nutrient cycling, and benthic-pelagic coupling [4-6 ]. Under ongoing warming, climate oscillations and extreme warming events may increase in frequency and severity [7, 8 ], which could trigger functional shifts with profound consequences for ecosystem functioning and services.
RI Villeger, Sebastien/C-6272-2011
OI Villeger, Sebastien/0000-0002-2362-7178; Marchal,
   Paul/0000-0003-2047-4599; McLean, Matthew/0000-0001-6518-6043
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0960-9822
EI 1879-0445
PD NOV 19
PY 2018
VL 28
IS 22
BP 3654
EP +
DI 10.1016/j.cub.2018.09.050
SC Biochemistry & Molecular Biology; Cell Biology
UT WOS:000450614200027
PM 30416056
ER

PT J
AU McLean, M
   Mouillot, D
   Auber, A
AF McLean, Matthew
   Mouillot, David
   Auber, Arnaud
TI Ecological and life history traits explain a climate-induced shift in a
   temperate marine fish community
SO MARINE ECOLOGY PROGRESS SERIES
DT Article
DE Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation; Climate warming; English Channel;
   Functional ecology; Principal response curves; Response traits
ID ATLANTIC MULTIDECADAL OSCILLATION; MANAGING ECOSYSTEM SERVICES;
   FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; SPECIES TRAITS; REGIME SHIFT; ENGLISH-CHANNEL;
   K-SELECTION; R-SELECTION; NORTH; FISHERIES
AB A better understanding of community dynamics and ecosystem functioning can be achieved by describing how community functional structure responds to environmental change over both time and space and by identifying which functional groups best mediate community responses. Here, we used a trait-based approach in combination with a newly developed application of principal response curves to functionally characterize a rapid taxonomic shift in the eastern English Channel fish community in the late 1990s. We identified the functional groups with the greatest contributions to the overall shift in fish functional structure and uncovered significant trait-environment relationships. We found that pelagic species with rapid life history cycles, characterized by broadcast spawning, small offspring size, and early maturation, declined considerably in abundance following an increase in sea surface temperature associated with a warming phase of the Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation, which was likely exacerbated by historical fishing pressure. In contrast, species with late maturation, high parental care, and few, well-developed offspring increased in abundance, reinforcing that fish community responses to climate warming are strongly mediated through life history traits. By examining how environmental factors drove a community shift at the trait level, we provide a mechanistic understanding of how fish functional structure responds to rapid environmental change.
OI McLean, Matthew/0000-0001-6518-6043
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0171-8630
EI 1616-1599
PD NOV 15
PY 2018
VL 606
BP 175
EP 186
DI 10.3354/meps12766
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology;
   Oceanography
UT WOS:000450352900013
ER

PT J
AU Lopes, ML
   Rodrigues, JP
   Crespo, D
   Dolbeth, M
   Calado, R
   Lillebo, AI
AF Lopes, Marta Lobao
   Rodrigues, Joana Patricio
   Crespo, Daniel
   Dolbeth, Marina
   Calado, Ricardo
   Lillebo, Ana Isabel
TI Functional traits of a native and an invasive clam of the genus
   Ruditapes occurring in sympatry in a coastal lagoon
SO SCIENTIFIC REPORTS
DT Article
ID MANILA CLAM; TAPES-PHILIPPINARUM; BIOTURBATION; PORTUGAL; ESTUARY;
   MARINE; IMPACT; RIA; SEDIMENTS; ECOSYSTEM
AB The main objective of this study was to evaluate the functional traits regarding bioturbation activity and its influence in the nutrient cycling of the native clam species Ruditapes decussatus and the invasive species Ruditapes philippinarum in Ria de Aveiro lagoon. Presently, these species live in sympatry and the impact of the invasive species was evaluated under controlled microcosmos setting, through combined/manipulated ratios of both species, including monospecific scenarios and a control without bivalves. Bioturbation intensity was measured by maximum, median and mean mix depth of particle redistribution, as well as by Surface Boundary Roughness (SBR), using time-lapse fluorescent sediment profile imaging (f-SPI) analysis, through the use of luminophores. Water nutrient concentrations (NH4-N, NOx-N and PO4-P) were also evaluated. This study showed that there were no significant differences in the maximum, median and mean mix depth of particle redistribution, SBR and water nutrient concentrations between the different ratios of clam species tested. Significant differences were only recorded between the control treatment (no bivalves) and those with bivalves. Thus, according to the present work, in a scenario of potential replacement of the native species by the invasive species, no significant differences are anticipated in short- and long-term regarding the tested functional traits.
RI CESAM, UA/M-3762-2015
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 2045-2322
PD NOV 15
PY 2018
VL 8
AR 16901
DI 10.1038/s41598-018-34556-8
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000450167700072
PM 30442898
ER

PT J
AU Maresca, V
   Fusaro, L
   Sorbo, S
   Siciliano, A
   Loppi, S
   Paoli, L
   Monaci, F
   Karam, EA
   Piscopo, M
   Guida, M
   Galdiero, E
   Insolvibile, M
   Basile, A
AF Maresca, Viviana
   Fusaro, Lina
   Sorbo, Sergio
   Siciliano, Antonietta
   Loppi, Stefano
   Paoli, Luca
   Monaci, Fabrizio
   Karam, Elham Asadi
   Piscopo, Marina
   Guida, Marco
   Galdiero, Emilia
   Insolvibile, Marilena
   Basile, Adriana
TI Functional and structural biomarkers to monitor heavy metal pollution of
   one of the most contaminated freshwater sites in Southern Europe
SO ECOTOXICOLOGY AND ENVIRONMENTAL SAFETY
DT Article
DE Biomonitoring; Leptodictyurn riparium; Heavy metal pollution;
   Biomarkers; Oxidative stress; Ultrastructure damage; DNA damages
ID MOSS FONTINALIS-ANTIPYRETICA; CELL GEL-ELECTROPHORESIS; L EX HEDW;
   OXIDATIVE STRESS; DNA-DAMAGE; ANTIOXIDANT ACTIVITY; LIPID-PEROXIDATION;
   AQUATIC BRYOPHYTES; PLANTS; ACCUMULATION
AB This study evaluated the biological effects of highly polluted freshwater environment (Regi Lagni channels, S Italy) on the aquatic moss Leptodictyinn riparium, exposed in bags at three sites representative of different environmental conditions and characterized by different heavy metal burdens. Bioaccumulation, ultrastructural alterations, Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) production, antioxidant enzymes activity and DNA damage were assessed. To better evaluate the biological response of the moss species to heavy metals, the same biological parameters were assessed also in L. riparium samples cultured in vitro using metal mixtures at the same concentrations as measured at the 3 field exposure sites. Heavy metals were accumulated into the moss tissues causing severe ultra-structural damages at higher concentration case studies, and the ROS production as well as the activity of the enzyme followed a concentration-dependent increase. However, the DNA damage trend suggested a threshold effect that changed between field and in vitro experiment. The enrichment factor suggests that the concentration in the most polluted site is close to the upper limit of L. riparium to accumulate metals. Overall, combining measures of the morpho-functional traits at different level contribute to improving the knowledge about the tolerance of L. riparium to heavy metal stress, suggesting that this moss could be suitable for biomonitoring activity in field conditions.
RI Monaci, Fabrizio/B-6611-2012
OI Monaci, Fabrizio/0000-0001-5489-1310; Loppi, Stefano/0000-0002-3404-1017
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0147-6513
EI 1090-2414
PD NOV 15
PY 2018
VL 163
BP 665
EP 673
DI 10.1016/j.ecoenv.2018.07.122
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Toxicology
UT WOS:000443104400078
PM 30098556
ER

PT J
AU Weigel, B
   Bonsdorff, E
AF Weigel, Benjamin
   Bonsdorff, Erik
TI Trait-based predation suitability offers insight into effects of
   changing prey communities
SO PEERJ
DT Article
DE Predator-prey interaction; Food quality; Functional structure; Prey
   characteristic; Functional traits; Zoobenthos; Fish; Baltic Sea
ID PERCH PERCA-FLUVIATILIS; ROACH RUTILUS-RUTILUS; FOOD-WEB STRUCTURE;
   FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; CLIMATE-CHANGE; STOMACH CONTENTS; FISH;
   BIODIVERSITY; DIET; SEA
AB Increasing environmental pressures and human impacts are reshaping community structures and species interactions throughout all trophic levels. The morphological and behavioural characteristics of species communities contain key ecological information on why prey species appear attractive to predators but are rarely applied when exploring predator-prey (PP) relationships. Expanding our knowledge on how changing prey communities can alter the food resource suitability (RS) for predators is vital for understanding PP dynamics in changing ecosystems. Detailed predator diet data are commonly restricted to commercially important species and often not available over long temporal scales. To find out whether structural changes of prey communities impact the food RS for predator communities over space and time, we apply a novel framework to describe and interpret changes in predator diet-suitability based on predation-relevant traits of prey. We use information on described feeding links from the literature to compile the prey spectrum for each predator and subsequently translate the prey-species into a prey-trait spectrum. For each predator, we then calculate a frequency-based prey-trait affinity score and relate it to the available food resource pool, the community weighted means of prey traits, resulting in a prey-suitability measure. We aim to reveal whether a described multi-decadal change in the community structure of zoobenthos had an impact on the food suitability for the benthic-feeding fish in a coastal system of the Baltic Sea. We assess the direction of change in resource quality from the perspective of benthic-feeding fish and describe predator-specific responses to examine which species are likely to profit or be disadvantaged by changes in their prey spectrum. Furthermore, we test the relationship between functional diversity of prey communities and food suitability for predators, and whether predation linkage-structures are affected through prey community-changes. Our results show that changes in zoobenthic communities had a positive effect on the food suitability for most benthic-feeding fish, implying more suitable food resources. Species-specific responses of predators suggest varying plasticity to cope with prey assemblages of different trait compositions. Additionally, the functional diversity of zoobenthos had a positive effect on the food suitability for predator fish. The changing trait compositions of prey influenced the PP linkage-structure, indicating varying specialisation of benthic feeding fish towards available food resources. Our findings suggest that changing morphological characteristics of prey can impact food RS features for its predators. This approach enables long-term evaluation of prey quality characteristics where no detailed diet data is available and allows for cross-system comparison as it is not relying on taxonomic identities per se.
OI Weigel, Benjamin/0000-0003-2302-5529
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 2167-8359
PD NOV 6
PY 2018
VL 6
AR e5899
DI 10.7717/peerj.5899
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000452327000010
PM 30416889
ER

PT J
AU Kiorboe, T
   Visser, AP
   Andersen, KH
AF Kiorboe, Thomas
   Visser, Andre Prime
   Andersen, Ken H.
TI A trait-based approach to ocean ecology
SO ICES JOURNAL OF MARINE SCIENCE
DT Article
DE defence; fish; mechanistic; plankton; resource acquisition; trade-offs
ID DIEL VERTICAL MIGRATION; 3-WAY TRADE-OFF; FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; SEASONAL
   SUCCESSION; MARINE BIODIVERSITY; COMMUNITY ECOLOGY; SIZE SPECTRUM;
   CELL-SIZE; ZOOPLANKTON; PLANKTON
AB Trait-based ecology merges evolutionary with classical population and community ecology and is a rapidly developing branch of ecology. It describes ecosystems as consisting of individuals rather than species, and characterizes individuals by few key traits that are interrelated through trade-offs. The fundamental rationale is that the spatio-temporal distribution of organisms and their functional role in ecosystems depend on their traits rather than on their taxonomical affiliation. The approach respects that interactions are between individuals, not between species or populations, and in trait-based models ecosystem structure emerges as a result of interactions between individuals and with the environments, rather than being prescribed. It offers an alternative to classical species-centric approaches and has the potential to describe complex ecosystems in simple ways and to assess the effects of environmental change on ecosystem structure and function. Here, we describe the components of the trait-based approach and apply it to describe and model marine ecosystems. Our description is illustrated with multiple examples of life in the ocean from unicellular plankton to fish.
OI Visser, Andre/0000-0002-1604-7263
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1054-3139
EI 1095-9289
PD NOV-DEC
PY 2018
VL 75
IS 6
BP 1849
EP 1863
DI 10.1093/icesjms/fsy090
SC Fisheries; Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000452130300002
ER

PT J
AU Renaud, PE
   Daase, M
   Banas, NS
   Gabrielsen, TM
   Soreide, JE
   Varpe, O
   Cottier, F
   Falk-Petersen, S
   Halsband, C
   Vogedes, D
   Heggland, K
   Berge, J
AF Renaud, Paul E.
   Daase, Malin
   Banas, Neil S.
   Gabrielsen, Tove M.
   Soreide, Janne E.
   Varpe, Oystein
   Cottier, Finlo
   Falk-Petersen, Stig
   Halsband, Claudia
   Vogedes, Daniel
   Heggland, Kristin
   Berge, Jorgen
TI Pelagic food-webs in a changing Arctic: a trait-based perspective
   suggests a mode of resilience
SO ICES JOURNAL OF MARINE SCIENCE
DT Article
DE Arctic ecosystem; Calanus; life-history modelling; secondary production
ID COPEPOD CALANUS-GLACIALIS; EASTERN BERING-SEA; LIFE-HISTORY; BODY-SIZE;
   CLIMATE-CHANGE; GREENLAND SEA; FINMARCHICUS; TEMPERATURE; FJORD; SPP.
AB Arctic marine ecosystems support fisheries of significant and increasing economic and nutritional value. Commercial stocks are sustained by pelagic food webs with relatively few keystone taxa mediating energy transfer to higher trophic levels, and it remains largely unknown how these taxa will be affected by changing climate and the influx of boreal taxa. Calanus species store large quantities of lipids, making these zooplankton a critical link in marine food-webs. The Arctic Calanus species are usually larger and, importantly, have been suggested to contain disproportionately larger lipid stores than their boreal congeners. Continued climate warming and subsequent changes in primary production regimes have been predicted to lead to a shift from the larger, lipid-rich Arctic species, Calanus glacialis and Calanus hyperboreus, toward the smaller, boreal Calanus finmarchicus in the European Arctic, with negative consequences for top predators. Our data show that lipid content is closely related to body size for all three species, i. e. is not a species-specific trait, and that there is considerable overlap in size between C. finmarchicus and C. glacialis. A trait-based life-history model was used to examine an idealized scenario where, in a changed Arctic with a longer period of primary production, C. glacialis-and C. hyperboreuslike copepods are indeed replaced by C. finmarchicus-like individuals, whether through competition, plasticity, hybridization, or evolution. However, the model finds that transfer of energy from primary producers to higher predators may actually be more efficient in this future scenario, because of the changes in generation length and population turnover rate that accompany the body-size shifts. These findings suggest that Arctic marine food webs may be more resilient to climate-related shifts in the Calanus complex than previously assumed.
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 1054-3139
EI 1095-9289
PD NOV-DEC
PY 2018
VL 75
IS 6
BP 1871
EP 1881
DI 10.1093/icesjms/fsy063
SC Fisheries; Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000452130300004
ER

PT J
AU Abecia, JED
   Luiz, OJ
   King, AJ
AF Abecia, Janine E. D.
   Luiz, Osmar J.
   King, Alison J.
TI Intraspecific morphological and reproductive trait variation in mouth
   almighty Glossamia aprion (Apogonidae) across different flow
   environments
SO JOURNAL OF FISH BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE Daly River; flow habitat; Glossamia aprion; morphology; mouth-brooding;
   northern Australia
ID FRESH-WATER FISH; TROUT SALMO-TRUTTA; EGG SIZE; SWIMMING SPEED; DALY
   RIVER; TRADE-OFFS; ECOMORPHOLOGY; LAKE; DIVERSIFICATION; BIOGEOGRAPHY
AB Intraspecific variability, although comparably less studied than interspecific variation, is an important tool in understanding population responses to environmental gradients. This study investigated intraspecific trait variation across three contrasting aquatic flow habitat types (intermittent creek, billabong and river) in a common mouth-brooding freshwater fish in northern Australia, the mouth almighty Glossamia aprion. Samples of G. aprion were collected at various sites, within the Daly River catchment. It was predicted that a number of morphological and reproductive traits would vary among individuals across the contrasting habitats. Five out of the nine morphological and reproductive traits studied significantly varied across flow habitat types. Significant intraspecific variation in functional traits related to foraging and reproduction, such as relative eye size, eye vertical position and relative maxillary length in males suggest that the inherent characteristics of each flow habitat type could be exerting selective pressure on the morphology of G. aprion. Interestingly, traits related to swimming performance (body lateral shape) and manoeuvrability (pectoral fin ventral position) differed between flow habitat types but showed inconsistent responses to predictions. Whilst this study was temporally and spatially limited, it highlights that intraspecific variability in morphological traits can occur among flow habitat types over relatively small spatial scales.
OI Luiz, Osmar/0000-0002-6995-6524
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0022-1112
EI 1095-8649
PD NOV
PY 2018
VL 93
IS 5
BP 961
EP 971
DI 10.1111/jfb.13821
SC Fisheries; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000451578000020
PM 30267413
ER

PT J
AU Epstein, JM
   Pine, WE
   Romagosa, CM
   Scott, MC
   Phillips, CT
   Marion, CA
   Baiser, B
AF Epstein, Joshua M.
   Pine, William E., III
   Romagosa, Christina M.
   Scott, Mark C.
   Phillips, Catherine T.
   Marion, Cathy A.
   Baiser, Benjamin
TI State- and Regional-Scale Patterns and Drivers of Freshwater Fish
   Functional Diversity in the Southeastern USA
SO TRANSACTIONS OF THE AMERICAN FISHERIES SOCIETY
DT Article
ID LAND-USE; ENVIRONMENTAL-CHANGE; CONSERVATION STATUS; UNITED-STATES;
   HOMOGENIZATION; ASSEMBLAGES; STREAMS; RIVER; NORTH; BIODIVERSITY
AB Understanding biodiversity patterns and their drivers across large spatial scales has become a necessary component of addressing complex multiscale conservation challenges. Increasingly, functional diversity measures are being used to provide insight on the ecological integrity of ecosystems. We estimated functional diversity at two different spatial extents using data sets of contrasting sampling intensity and time duration and compared these two different approaches. For our regional-scale analysis, we used large-scale fish sampling data sets and identified 397 species across subbasins within the southeastern USA. For our state-scale analysis, we used data from the South Carolina Department of Natural Resources Statewide Stream Assessment through which 101 species were collected from wadeable streams across South Carolina. For all fish species, we scored trophic and reproductive traits and measured trophic and reproductive functional diversity across subbasins and South Carolina streams. We assessed differences in functional diversity between level III ecoregions, quantified the influence of imperiled and invasive species on functional diversity, and modeled relationships between functional diversity and environmental variables at the state scale using Random Forest regression. At both scales, we found support for higher trophic functional diversity in high-elevation ecoregions, while reproductive functional diversity was generally higher in low-elevation ecoregions. The inclusion of imperiled species increased functional diversity estimates, while invasive species decreased functional diversity estimates except for reproductive functional diversity at the regional scale. Environmental variables that correlated with functional diversity at the state scale included forest cover, elevation, and conductivity. The observed spatial patterns of functional diversity, the environmental variables identified as predictors of functional diversity, and knowledge of how imperiled and invasive species influence functional diversity can be used to guide freshwater fish conservation efforts across the southeastern U.S. region. Additionally, these findings highlight the utility of data from intensive, standardized, broad-scale aquatic surveys in addressing these and similar questions regarding freshwater diversity.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0002-8487
EI 1548-8659
PD NOV
PY 2018
VL 147
IS 6
BP 1179
EP 1198
DI 10.1002/tafs.10110
SC Fisheries
UT WOS:000450602900014
ER

PT J
AU Van Echelpoel, W
   Forio, MAE
   Van Butsel, J
   Lock, K
   Utreras, JAD
   Dominguez-Granda, LE
   Goethals, PLM
AF Van Echelpoel, Wout
   Forio, Marie Anne Eurie
   Van Butsel, Jana
   Lock, Koen
   Duenas Utreras, Juan Antonio
   Elvin Dominguez-Granda, Luis
   Goethals, Peter L. M.
TI Macroinvertebrate functional feeding group structure along an impacted
   tropical river: The Portoviejo River (Ecuador)
SO LIMNOLOGICA
DT Article
DE Monitoring; Location clustering; Functional dynamics; Anthropogenic
   impact; Land use management
ID ECOLOGICAL WATER-QUALITY; NEOTROPICAL STREAMS; ANDEAN STREAMS; INDEX;
   ASSEMBLAGES; DISTURBANCE; HABITAT; TEMPLET; TRAITS; MODELS
AB Performing biological assessments of freshwater systems is crucial in most tropical rivers as the lack of in-depth knowledge about functional diversity inhibits the design of appropriate water management and restoration plans. Therefore, in this paper, we investigated the presence and evolution of the functional diversity of the macroinvertebrate community along a tropical river. More specifically, 31 locations were sampled in the Portoviejo River (Ecuador) and identified macroinvertebrates were assigned to one of the following functional feeding groups (FEGs): shredders, collector-gatherers, collector-filterers, scraper-grazers and predators. Results show that high fluctuations and relatively low similarly in functional feeding group composition occurred among closely located sites, suggesting the presence of local disturbances. Locations close to the effluent of a wastewater treatment plant show an extreme dominance of scraper-grazers, suggesting elevated nutrient input and algae growth. Further downstream, the interaction of upstream disturbances and local land use influenced the community composition. These interactions and the confirmation of the importance of land use on aquatic communities underline the fact that management should include both taxonomic and functional diversity.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0075-9511
EI 1873-5851
PD NOV
PY 2018
VL 73
BP 12
EP 19
DI 10.1016/j.limno.2018.10.001
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000450900700002
ER

PT J
AU Givnish, TJ
   Zuluaga, A
   Spalink, D
   Gomez, MS
   Lam, VKY
   Saarela, JM
   Sass, C
   Iles, WJD
   de Sousa, DJL
   Leebens-Mack, J
   Pires, JC
   Zomlefer, WB
   Gandolfo, MA
   Davis, JI
   Stevenson, DW
   dePamphilis, C
   Specht, CD
   Graham, SW
   Barrett, CF
   Ane, C
AF Givnish, Thomas J.
   Zuluaga, Alejandro
   Spalink, Daniel
   Gomez, Marybel Soto
   Lam, Vivienne K. Y.
   Saarela, Jeffrey M.
   Sass, Chodon
   Iles, William J. D.
   Lima de Sousa, Danilo Jose
   Leebens-Mack, James
   Pires, J. Chris
   Zomlefer, Wendy B.
   Gandolfo, Maria A.
   Davis, Jerrold I.
   Stevenson, Dennis W.
   dePamphilis, Claude
   Specht, Chelsea D.
   Graham, Sean W.
   Barrett, Craig F.
   Ane, Cecile
TI Monocot plastid phylogenomics, timeline, net rates of species
   diversification, the power of multi-gene analyses, and a functional
   model for the origin of monocots
SO AMERICAN JOURNAL OF BOTANY
DT Article
DE aquatic origin; chloroplast; divergence times; diversification; fossil
   calibration; molecular phylogeny; monocot syndrome; monocotyledons;
   mycoheterotrophy; Zingiberales
ID MULTIPLE SEQUENCE ALIGNMENT; HORIZONTAL GENE-TRANSFER; PHYLOGENETIC
   INFERENCE; FLOWERING PLANTS; MORPHOLOGICAL EVOLUTION; HISTORICAL
   BIOGEOGRAPHY; BAMBUSOIDEAE POACEAE; RETICULATE EVOLUTION; MOLECULAR
   EVOLUTION; COMMELINID MONOCOTS
AB Premise of the Study Methods We present the first plastome phylogeny encompassing all 77 monocot families, estimate branch support, and infer monocot-wide divergence times and rates of species diversification. We conducted maximum likelihood analyses of phylogeny and BAMM studies of diversification rates based on 77 plastid genes across 545 monocots and 22 outgroups. We quantified how branch support and ascertainment vary with gene number, branch length, and branch depth. Key Results Conclusions Phylogenomic analyses shift the placement of 16 families in relation to earlier studies based on four plastid genes, add seven families, date the divergence between monocots and eudicots+Ceratophyllum at 136 Mya, successfully place all mycoheterotrophic taxa examined, and support recognizing Taccaceae and Thismiaceae as separate families and Arecales and Dasypogonales as separate orders. Only 45% of interfamilial divergences occurred after the Cretaceous. Net species diversification underwent four large-scale accelerations in PACMAD-BOP Poaceae, Asparagales sister to Doryanthaceae, Orchidoideae-Epidendroideae, and Araceae sister to Lemnoideae, each associated with specific ecological/morphological shifts. Branch ascertainment and support across monocots increase with gene number and branch length, and decrease with relative branch depth. Analysis of entire plastomes in Zingiberales quantifies the importance of non-coding regions in identifying and supporting short, deep branches. We provide the first resolved, well-supported monocot phylogeny and timeline spanning all families, and quantify the significant contribution of plastome-scale data to resolving short, deep branches. We outline a new functional model for the evolution of monocots and their diagnostic morphological traits from submersed aquatic ancestors, supported by convergent evolution of many of these traits in aquatic Hydatellaceae (Nymphaeales).
RI Graham, Sean/L-3944-2014
OI Graham, Sean/0000-0001-8209-5231
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0002-9122
EI 1537-2197
PD NOV
PY 2018
VL 105
IS 11
BP 1888
EP 1910
DI 10.1002/ajb2.1178
SC Plant Sciences
UT WOS:000450329600011
PM 30368769
ER

PT J
AU Weitere, M
   Erken, M
   Majdi, N
   Arndt, H
   Norf, H
   Reinshagen, M
   Traunspurger, W
   Walterscheid, A
   Wey, JK
AF Weitere, Markus
   Erken, Martina
   Majdi, Nabil
   Arndt, Hartmut
   Norf, Helge
   Reinshagen, Michael
   Traunspurger, Walter
   Walterscheid, Anja
   Wey, Jennifer K.
TI The food web perspective on aquatic biofilms
SO ECOLOGICAL MONOGRAPHS
DT Article
DE biofilm grazing; biogeochemical processes; microbial food web
   interactions; periphyton; protozoans; trait-based approach
ID DWELLING CILIATE COMMUNITIES; FREE-LIVING NEMATODES; FLUORESCENTLY
   LABELED BACTERIA; FRESH-WATER; STREAM BIOFILMS; GRAZING RESISTANCE;
   VIBRIO-CHOLERAE; RIVER BIOFILMS; NAKED AMEBAS; ECOLOGICAL STOICHIOMETRY
AB Biofilms, the complex communities of microbiota that live in association with aquatic interfaces, are considered to be hotspots of microbial life in many aquatic ecosystems. Although the importance of attached algae and bacteria is widely recognized, the role of the highly abundant biofilm-dwelling micrograzers (i.e., heterotrophic protists and small metazoans) is poorly understood. Studies often highlight the resistance of bacterial biofilms to grazing within the microbial food web and therefore argue that the micrograzers have a modulating role (i.e., have effects on biofilm phenotype) rather than a direct trophic role within biofilms. In the present review, we show that this view comes too short, and we establish a conceptual framework of biofilm food webs consisting of three major elements. (1) Energy pathways and subsidization from plankton. As inhabitants of interfaces, biofilm-dwelling grazers potentially access both planktonic organisms and surface-associated organisms. They can play an important role in importing planktonic production into the biofilm food web and thus in the coupling of the planktonic and benthic food webs. Nevertheless, specialized grazers are also able to utilize significant amounts of autochthonous biofilm production. (2) Horizontal complexity of the basal food web. While bacteria and algae within biofilms are edible in general, food quality and accessibility of both bacteria and algae can differ considerably between different prey phenotypes occurring during biofilm formation with respect to morphology, chemical defense, and nutrient stoichiometry. Instead of considering bacteria and algae within biofilms to be generally resistant to feeding by micrograzers, we suggest considering a horizontal food-quality axis to be at the base of biofilm food webs. This food quality gradient is probably associated with increasing costs for the micrograzers. (3) Vertical food web complexity and food chain length. In addition to the consumption of bacteria and algae, many predatory micrograzers exist within biofilm food webs. With the help of video microscopy, we were able to demonstrate the existence of a complex food web with several trophic levels within biofilms. Our conceptual framework should assist in integrating food web concepts and processes into whole-biofilm budgets and in understanding food-web-related interactions within biofilms.
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0012-9615
EI 1557-7015
PD NOV
PY 2018
VL 88
IS 4
BP 543
EP 559
DI 10.1002/ecm.1315
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000449887100004
ER

PT J
AU Schiebelhut, LM
   Dawson, MN
AF Schiebelhut, Lauren M.
   Dawson, Michael N.
TI Correlates of population genetic differentiation in marine and
   terrestrial environments
SO JOURNAL OF BIOGEOGRAPHY
DT Article
DE birds; community genetics; comparative phylogeography; dispersal
   syndrome; fishes; functional trait; gene flow; life history; marine
   invertebrates; synchronously diverging codistributed (SDC) species
ID LARVAL DISPERSAL; COMPARATIVE PHYLOGEOGRAPHY; BEETLES COLEOPTERA; FLOW;
   DISTANCE; DIVERSIFICATION; ADAPTATION; DURATION; FISH; CONNECTIVITY
AB Aim Theory predicts that differences in phylogeographic structure between species should be related to differences in life history, environment, and evolutionary time. Reviews of empirical studies suggest sometimes complex interactions and possibly a preponderance of exceptions to the predicted relationship that greater population genetic differentiation results from lower dispersal potential, as a function of life history. We apply an analytical framework, which controls for effects of environment and time, to test the hypothesis that contrasts in population genetic differentiation are proportional to contrasts in life history traits. Location Methods Global. We conducted a meta-analysis using contrasts of life history traits and population genetic differentiation between synchronously diverging codistributed (SDC) taxa. Because SDC taxa experienced the same environment at the same time, the effects of time and environment are effectively controlled when analysing other causes of genetic differentiation within SDC taxa. This offers the opportunity to rigorously test whether traits favouring greater dispersal potential-such as fecundity, census population size, and duration of the dispersive stage-do lead to lower population genetic differentiation. Results Main conclusions APPENDIX We find a strong inverse relationship between dispersal potential and population genetic differentiation, consistent with predictions. SDC species pairs with similar dispersal potential show similar population genetic differentiation; species with higher dispersal potential have lower population genetic differentiation, relative to species with lower dispersal potential. SDC comparisons provide a rigorous method for disentangling the factors driving patterns of genetic differentiation in the marine and nonmarine realms. We found broad support for the relationship that higher dispersal potential is associated with lower population genetic differentiation, the specifics of which can be influenced by place, time, and taxon. This relationship appears to be stronger on land than in the sea. However, many factors influence population genetic structure; deviations in measured versus predicted population genetic differentiation may indicate the influence of drift or selection. Too often, too many factors go unmeasured, constraining our ability to disaggregate dispersal syndromes and fully resolve the influence of specific life history characteristics on gene flow.
OI Dawson, Michael/0000-0001-7927-8395
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0305-0270
EI 1365-2699
PD NOV
PY 2018
VL 45
IS 11
BP 2427
EP 2441
DI 10.1111/jbi.13437
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Physical Geography
UT WOS:000449496000001
ER

PT J
AU Watson, SCL
   Paterson, DM
   Widdicombe, S
   Beaumont, NJ
AF Watson, Stephen C. L.
   Paterson, David M.
   Widdicombe, Stephen
   Beaumont, Nicola J.
TI Evaluation of estuarine biotic indices to assess macro-benthic structure
   and functioning following nutrient remediation actions: A case study on
   the Eden estuary Scotland
SO REGIONAL STUDIES IN MARINE SCIENCE
DT Article
DE Ecological indicators; Macro-invertebrates; Estuarine recovery;
   Ecological quality; M-AMBI; Biological traits analysis (BTA)
ID COASTAL MARINE ECOSYSTEMS; TRAITS ANALYSIS BTA; BIOLOGICAL TRAITS;
   COMMUNITY STRUCTURE; NATURAL VARIABILITY; TEMPERATE ESTUARY;
   BIODIVERSITY; SYSTEMS; QUALITY; INDICATORS
AB Despite a wealth of methods currently proposed by the European Water Framework Directive (WFD) to assess macro-benthic integrity, determining good ecological status (GES) and assessing ecosystem recovery following anthropogenic degradation is still one of the biggest challenges in marine ecology research. In this study, our aim was to test a number of commonly used structural (e.g. Shannon-Wiener, Average Taxonomic Diversity (Delta), M-AMBI) and functional indicators (e.g. BTA, BPc) currently used in benthic research and monitoring programmes on the Eden estuary (Scotland). Historically the estuary has a legacy of high nutrient conditions and was designated as a Nitrate Vulnerable Zone (NVZ) in 2003, whence major management measures were implemented in order to ameliorate the risk of eutrophication symptoms. We therefore collected data on intertidal macro-benthic communities over a sixteen year interval, covering a pre-management (1999) and post-management (2015) period to assess the effectiveness of the intended restoration efforts. In the post-management period, the results suggested an improvement in the structure and functioning of the estuary as a whole, but macro-benthic assemblages responded to restoration variably along the estuarine gradient. The greatest improvements were noticed in the upper and central sites of the estuary with functional traits analysis suggesting an increased ability of these sites to provide ecosystem services associated with the benthic environment such as carbon and organic matter cycling. Generally, almost all of the structural and functional indicators detected the prevailing environmental conditions (with the exception of (Pielou's index and Average Taxonomic Diversity (.)), highlighting the appropriateness of such methods to be used in monitoring the recovery of transitional systems. This research also provides a robust baseline to monitor further management actions in the Eden estuary and provides evidence that notable reductions in nitrate concentrations resulting from NVZ designations may result in significant improvements to benthic structure and functioning. Crown Copyright (C) 2018 Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
OI Paterson, David/0000-0003-1174-6476
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 2352-4855
PD NOV
PY 2018
VL 24
BP 379
EP 391
DI 10.1016/j.rsma.2018.09.012
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000449553500038
ER

PT J
AU Boelter, T
   Stenert, C
   Pires, MM
   Medeiros, ESF
   Maltchik, L
AF Boelter, Thalse
   Stenert, Cristina
   Pires, Mateus Marques
   Figueredo Medeiros, Elvio Sergio
   Maltchik, Leonardo
TI Influence of plant habitat types and the presence of fish predators on
   macroinvertebrate assemblages in southern Brazilian highland wetlands
SO FUNDAMENTAL AND APPLIED LIMNOLOGY
DT Article
DE macrophytes; ponds; predation; structural complexity; life-history
   traits
ID BENTHIC COMMUNITY STRUCTURE; INVERTEBRATE COMMUNITIES; STRUCTURAL
   COMPLEXITY; BODY-SIZE; DIVERSITY; PREY; MACROPHYTE; LAKES; DIET;
   EXTRAPOLATION
AB Fish predation and habitat structure provided by aquatic plants influence wetland macroinvertebrates. However, the patterns of macroinvertebrate distribution (including their functional structure) in relation to fish occurrence and plant habitats comprised by differently shaped macrophytes remain challenging to predict in many wetland systems, and are especially little studied in the Neotropics. We assessed the effects of fish presence and aquatic plant habitat types with different levels of structural complexity (Sphagnum bogs: 'high complexity', Peruvian watergrass: 'low complexity') on the taxonomic and functional structures of macroinvertebrate assemblages in the southern Brazilian highland wetlands. We tested the expectations that macroinvertebrate assemblages have: (1) a lower richness and abundance, and are comprised by taxa with traits related to less prey vulnerability in the presence of fishes; (2) a higher richness and abundance in plant habitats with higher complexity, and distinct taxonomic and functional compositions among habitats. Six wetlands of similar hydroperiods presenting both habitat types and differing according to fish presence (three wetlands contained predatory fish species; the other three were fishless) were seasonally sampled in 2012 and 2013. Macroinvertebrate assemblages changed only according to the fish presence. Richness and abundance were higher in fishless wetlands, and the effect of fish presence on macroinvertebrate taxonomic and trait compositions was also related to each wetland, suggesting varying effects of fish species. Our results suggest that macroinvertebrate assemblages are primarily structured by fish presence rather than plant habitat types in highland wetlands in southern Brazil, and that the influence of plant habitats possibly co-varies with other local environmental factors.
OI Marques Pires, Mateus/0000-0002-5728-8733
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1863-9135
PD NOV
PY 2018
VL 192
IS 1
BP 65
EP 77
DI 10.1127/fal/2018/1162
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000448798400006
ER

PT J
AU Kong, ZY
   Kou, WB
   Ma, YT
   Yu, HT
   Ge, G
   Wu, L
AF Kong, Zhaoyu
   Kou, Wenbo
   Ma, Yantian
   Yu, Haotian
   Ge, Gang
   Wu, Lan
TI Seasonal dynamics of the bacterioplankton community in a large, shallow,
   highly dynamic freshwater lake
SO CANADIAN JOURNAL OF MICROBIOLOGY
DT Article
DE bacterial community composition; bacterial diversity; water level; 16S
   rRNA gene; Poyang Lake
ID BACTERIAL COMMUNITY; YANGTZE-RIVER; WITHIN-LAKE; ENVIRONMENTAL
   GRADIENTS; MICROBIAL COMMUNITIES; SPATIAL-DISTRIBUTION; POYANG LAKE;
   TAIHU LAKE; DIVERSITY; CHINA
AB The spatiotemporal shifts of the bacterioplankton community can mirror their transition of functional traits in an aquatic ecosystem. However, the spatiotemporal variation of the bacterioplankton community composition structure (BCCS) within a large, shallow, highly dynamic freshwater lake is still poorly understood. Here, we examined the seasonal and spatial variability of the BCCs within Poyang Lake by sequencing the 16S rRNA gene amplicon to explore how hydrological changes affect the BCCs. Principal coordinate analysis showed that the BCCs varied significantly among four sampling seasons, but not spatially. The seasonal changes of the BCCs were mainly attributed to the differences between autumn and spring-winter. Higher alpha diversity indices were observed in autumn. Redundancy analysis indicated that the BCCs co-variated with water level, pH, temperature, total phosphorus, ammoniacal nitrogen, electrical conductivity, total nitrogen, and turbidity. Among them, water level was the key determinant separating autumn BCCs from the BCCs in other seasons. A significantly lower relative abundance of Burkholderiales (betI and betVII) and a higher relative abundance of Actinomycetales (acI, acTH1, and acTH2) were found in autumn than in other seasons. Overall, our results suggest that water level changes associated with pH, temperature, and nutrient status shaped the seasonal patterns of the BCCs within Poyang Lake.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0008-4166
EI 1480-3275
PD NOV
PY 2018
VL 64
IS 11
BP 786
EP 797
DI 10.1139/cjm-2018-0126
SC Biochemistry & Molecular Biology; Biotechnology & Applied Microbiology;
   Immunology; Microbiology
UT WOS:000448727200002
PM 29791806
ER

PT J
AU Lamothe, KA
   Alofs, KM
   Jackson, DA
   Somers, KM
AF Lamothe, Karl A.
   Alofs, Karen M.
   Jackson, Donald A.
   Somers, Keith M.
TI Functional diversity and redundancy of freshwater fish communities
   across biogeographic and environmental gradients
SO DIVERSITY AND DISTRIBUTIONS
DT Article
DE freshwater fish; functional diversity; functional redundancy; Ontario;
   resilience
ID LAURENTIAN GREAT-LAKES; CLIMATE-CHANGE; PLANT-COMMUNITIES; SPECIES
   RICHNESS; ONTARIO LAKES; DISSIMILARITY COEFFICIENTS; MULTIPLE TRAITS;
   BOREAL LAKES; BODY-SIZE; ECOSYSTEM
AB Aim: Functional redundancy occurs when species share overlapping ecological functions and is considered an important component of ecosystem resilience. However, much of what we know about functional redundancy comes from relatively species-rich terrestrial and marine environments. Here, we examined patterns of functional redundancy among Ontario freshwater fish communities with species richness levels ranging from 4 to 30 species across lakes of differing size, depth, productivities and thermal characteristics.
   Location: Six thousand nine hundred and seventy-seven lakes in Ontario, Canada.
   Methods: We examined functional redundancy by quantifying the relationship between functional diversity and species richness in lakes across Ontario and within smaller biogeographic regions. We used null models to test whether fish communities had greater redundancy than expected from random assemblages. We then used generalized additive models (GAMs) to predict how patterns of redundancy vary across environmental variables. At last, we compared species-level functional rarity metrics across fish thermal preference groups, body sizes and species occurrence rates.
   Results: The functional diversity and species richness relationship were saturating among fish communities at the provincial scale but varied between smaller regions with differing biogeographic histories. Most communities fell within expectations from weighted null models of the functional diversity and species richness relationship. The GAMs indicated that fish communities in the largest, deepest and warmest lakes showed the greatest overall functional redundancy. No differences were observed in functional rarity measures between thermal preference groups, across body sizes or across species occurrence rates.
   Main conclusions: Although lakes in this study were relatively depauperate of fish species, Ontario fish communities exhibited functional redundancy at the provincial scale, with variation regionally. North-eastern communities showed the least saturating relationship overall as predicted by historical biogeographic patterns of freshwater fish colonization. Overall, this study provides a broad perspective of freshwater fish diversity patterns and highlights the importance of investigating redundancy from different perspectives and multiple spatial scales.
OI Jackson, Donald A/0000-0002-6107-0753; Lamothe, Karl/0000-0001-9875-8204
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1366-9516
EI 1472-4642
PD NOV
PY 2018
VL 24
IS 11
BP 1612
EP 1626
DI 10.1111/ddi.12812
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000448070600009
ER

PT J
AU Pivovaroff, AL
   Cook, VMW
   Santiago, LS
AF Pivovaroff, Alexandria L.
   Cook, Victoria M. W.
   Santiago, Louis S.
TI Stomatal behaviour and stem xylem traits are coordinated for woody plant
   species under exceptional drought conditions
SO PLANT CELL AND ENVIRONMENT
DT Article
DE anisohydry; California; chaparral; coastal sage scrub; hydraulic safety
   margin; isohydry; Mediterranean-type ecosystem; stomatal conductance;
   water potential
ID SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA; ANISOHYDRIC BEHAVIORS; VEGETATION MORTALITY;
   FUNCTIONAL TRAITS; EXTREME DROUGHT; WATER; VULNERABILITY; CAVITATION;
   RESPONSES; CLIMATE
AB Isohydry (maintenance of plant water potential at the cost of carbon gain) and anisohydry (gas exchange maintenance at the cost of declining plant water status) make up two ends of a stomatal drought response strategy continuum. However, few studies have merged measures of stomatal regulation with xylem hydraulic safety strategies based on in situ field measurements. The goal of this study was to characterize the stomatal and xylem hydraulic safety strategies of woody species in the biodiverse Mediterranean-type ecosystem region of California. Measurements were conducted in situ when California was experiencing the most severe drought conditions in the past 1,200 years. We found coordination among stomatal, hydraulic, and standard leaf functional traits. For example, stem xylem vulnerability to cavitation (P-50) was correlated with the water potential at stomatal closure (P-close); more resistant species had a more negative water potential at stomatal closure. The degree of isohydry-anisohydry, defined at P-close-P-50, was correlated with the hydraulic safety margin across species; more isohydric species had a larger hydraulic safety margin. In addition, we report for the first time P-close values below -10 MPa. Measuring these traits in a biodiverse region under exceptional drought conditions contributes to our understanding of plant drought responses.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0140-7791
EI 1365-3040
PD NOV
PY 2018
VL 41
IS 11
BP 2617
EP 2626
DI 10.1111/pce.13367
SC Plant Sciences
UT WOS:000447468100009
PM 29904932
ER

PT J
AU Fusconi, A
   Mucciarelli, M
AF Fusconi, Anna
   Mucciarelli, Marco
TI How important is arbuscular mycorrhizal colonization in wetland and
   aquatic habitats?
SO ENVIRONMENTAL AND EXPERIMENTAL BOTANY
DT Article
DE Aerenchyma; Arbuscular mycorrhizal colonization; Dicots; Hydrological
   conditions; Monocots; Wetland indicator
ID DARK SEPTATE ENDOPHYTES; RADIAL OXYGEN LOSS; LOBELIA-DORTMANNA;
   PLANT-ROOTS; LITTORELLA-UNIFLORA; ORGANIC ENRICHMENT; ADVENTITIOUS
   ROOTS; PHOSPHORUS UPTAKE; FUNGAL COMMUNITY; GROWTH
AB Plants that live in aquatic habitats are frequently subjected to oxygen limitation and many of them modify their anatomy and physiology to counteract hypoxia. In these habitats, the role of plant associations with arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AMF), which are widespread in terrestrial environments and frequently confer benefits to the associated plant, is still debated. Starting from data taken from 34 selected papers, this study focuses on the occurrence of AMF in the roots of wetland and aquatic plants, taking into account the hydrological conditions of the sites, the plant wetland indicators and life forms, plant taxonomy and colonization by dark septate endophytes. The results have demonstrated the importance of hydrology in controlling the frequency and intensity of AMF root colonization, which tends to be low in obligate wetland plants. Moreover, colonization is generally lower and, possibly, less functional in monocots than in dicots. We suggest that the hydrological conditions, by filtering species according to their water tolerance, shape plant community composition, and that although AMF colonization is one of the traits that may increase plant fitness, it is not the most important one. In fact, a range of nutritional and growth strategies, which are more variegated than in terrestrial habitats, exists in wetland/aquatic habitats, and these strategies may rely, or not, on AMF colonization, as a consequence of the habitat and species.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0098-8472
EI 1873-7307
PD NOV
PY 2018
VL 155
BP 128
EP 141
DI 10.1016/j.envexpbot.2018.06.016
SC Plant Sciences; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000446289500013
ER

PT J
AU Zhai, L
   Krauss, KW
   Liu, X
   Duberstein, JA
   Conner, WH
   DeAngelis, DL
   Sternberg, LDSL
AF Zhai, Lu
   Krauss, Ken W.
   Liu, Xin
   Duberstein, Jamie A.
   Conner, William H.
   DeAngelis, Donald L.
   Sternberg, Leonel D. S. L.
TI Growth stress response to sea level rise in species with contrasting
   functional traits: A case study in tidal freshwater forested wetlands
SO ENVIRONMENTAL AND EXPERIMENTAL BOTANY
DT Article
DE Sea level rise; Salinity; Water stress; Nutrient stress; Taxodiurn
   distichum; Phenology; N-2-fixation; Plant functional trait; Stable
   isotope
ID STABLE-ISOTOPE COMPOSITION; N-15 NATURAL-ABUNDANCE; TAXODIUM-DISTICHUM
   L; PLANT STEM-WATER; PHOSPHORUS ENRICHMENT; STOMATAL CONDUCTANCE;
   SALTWATER INTRUSION; MANGROVE FORESTS; MYRICA-CERIFERA; LEAF NITROGEN
AB With rising sea levels, mortality of glycophytes can be caused by water and nutrient stress under increasing salinity. However, the relative effects of these two stressors may vary by species-specific functional traits. For example, deciduous species, with leaves typically emerging during low salinity periods of the year, may suffer less from water stress than evergreen species. We sampled two woody species with contrasting functional traits: the evergreen and N-2-fixing waxmyrtle (Morella cerifera), and the deciduous and non-N-2 fixing baldcypress (Taxodium distichum) along a coastal river (South Carolina, USA) showing an increasing pattern of plant mortality along a salinity gradient. We first analyzed oxygen and hydrogen isotope ratios of plant stem water and river water to determine changes in plant source water at different sites. Then we analyzed foliar carbon and nitrogen isotope ratios (delta C-13 and delta N-15) along with nitrogen and phosphorus content (%N and %P) as proxies for the water and nutrient stress. Results showed that: (1) the two species had different water sources at the higher salinity sites; (2) foliar delta N-15 values of baldcypress decreased with higher salinity while retaining a constant delta C-13 value, and both of these isotope values were positively related with foliar %P, suggesting greater nutrient stress but minor water stress under high salinity; and (3) foliar delta C-13 values of waxmyrtle increased with higher salinity while retaining a constant foliar delta N-15 value, and neither of the values was significantly related to foliar nutrients, suggesting greater water stress but minor nutrient stress under high salinity. The different responses of the two species to high salinity may be related to their differences in leaf phenology and N-2-fixation. Our results suggest that nutrient stress, particularly of P, can contribute to stress and eventual high mortality of baldcypress exposed to salt water intrusion.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0098-8472
EI 1873-7307
PD NOV
PY 2018
VL 155
BP 378
EP 386
DI 10.1016/j.envexpbot.2018.07.023
SC Plant Sciences; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000446289500036
ER

PT J
AU Umetsu, CA
   Aguiar, FC
   Ferreira, MT
   Cancian, LF
   Camargo, AFM
AF Umetsu, Cristiane Akemi
   Aguiar, Francisca C.
   Ferreira, Maria Teresa
   Cancian, Leonardo Farage
   Monteiro Camargo, Antonio Fernando
TI Addressing bioassessment of tropical rivers using macrophytes: The case
   of Itanhaem Basin, Sao Paulo, Brazil
SO AQUATIC BOTANY
DT Article
DE Ecological quality; Tropical catchment; Macrophyte IBI; Multimetric
   index; River monitoring
ID PARANA RIVER; AQUATIC MACROPHYTES; LOWLAND STREAMS; BIOTIC INTEGRITY;
   AFRICAN RIVERS; COMMUNITIES; FLOODPLAIN; INDEX; LAKES; INDICATORS
AB We developed a pilot study on the potential of aquatic plants as indicators of ecological quality in tropical rivers to provide an index of biotic integrity for monitoring, conservation, and restoration purposes. We used floristic, environmental, and anthropogenic disturbance data from a 950 km(2) river basin in the southern littoral area of Sao Paulo State, Brazil (Itanhaem River Basin), and proposed a five-step methodological framework for the development of a macrophyte index in tropical river basins. Field surveys were carried out in 137 sites (Spring 2013-2014) of Itanhaem River for the index development and in 27 sites of Itapanhad River (Spring 2015) for its validation. A total of 44 aquatic plant species were recorded in the study area, and 11 metrics were evaluated as potential core metrics of the index. Principal Component Analysis distinguished two river types mostly related to geomorphological characteristics - the Upper river type in the mountainous region (average slope 23.7 degrees) and the Middle-low river type (average slope 9.2 degrees) in the floodplain. The Upper river catchment was characterized by extensive areas occupied by banana plantations, low water conductivity, sandy substrates, and homogeneous aquatic vegetation, whereas the Middle-low river catchment had more urban settlements and displayed high nitrogen and phosphorus contents in water and sediments. The index (MIBI-ITA) is preliminary and was based on species richness and life forms (e.g. submerged hydrophytes, helophytes). MIBI-ITA could only be developed for the lowlands and displayed a high discriminatory ability for distinguishing disturbance and a good performance with external data. Bioassessment in tropical rivers require further investigation on biogeography and long-term responses of macrophyte populations to stressors, as well as knowledge-base on river typology and functional traits of macrophytes, other than morpho-anatomic traits and diversity measures.
OI Aguiar, Francisca/0000-0003-2207-0264; Camargo,
   Antonio/0000-0003-3565-6838
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0304-3770
EI 1879-1522
PD NOV
PY 2018
VL 150
BP 53
EP 63
DI 10.1016/j.aquabot.2018.07.004
SC Plant Sciences; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000444356300008
ER

PT J
AU Cruz, LR
   Santos, LN
   Santos, AFGN
AF Cruz, Livia R.
   Santos, Luciano N.
   Santos, Alejandra F. G. N.
TI Changes of fish trophic guilds in Araruama Lagoon, Brazil: What can be
   inferred about functioning and structure of hypersaline lagoons?
SO ESTUARINE COASTAL AND SHELF SCIENCE
DT Article; Proceedings Paper
CT Estuarine-and-Coastal-Sciences-Association (ECSA) 56th Conference on
   Coastal Systems in Transition - From a Natural to and
   Anthropogenically-Modified State
CY SEP 04-07, 2016
CL Bremen, GERMANY
DE Diet; Feeding ecology; Trophic structure; Planktivores; Desalination;
   Eutrophication
ID COASTAL LAGOON; COMMUNITY STRUCTURE; TEMPORAL STRUCTURE; ASSEMBLAGES;
   SALINITY; ECOLOGY; ESTUARY; MEXICO; EVOLUTION; FISHERIES
AB In this paper, the diet and trophic structure of fish assemblages caught in two zones of the largest (similar to 220 km(2)) hypersaline coastal lagoon in South America were addressed quarterly along 2011, and the patterns were compared among seasons and to a previous study performed during typical hypersaline conditions (i.e. 1993) to assess the short-and long-term effects of desalinisation. Our results confirmed that in 2011, Araruama Lagoon experienced a strong decrease in salinity, particularly in the autumn, with the ranging values (i.e. 37-48) remaining below to the salinities (i.e. 52-67) reported for most of the 1965-2005 period, but matching those (i.e. <= 41 on the average) recorded during the atypical less-hypersaline conditions of 1989-1990. Fish trophic structure recorded during 2011 was composed of five guilds, in decreasing order of biomass: planktivores (31.14%), detritivores (26.24%), invertivores (25.65%), piscivores (15.09%), and omnivores (1.58%). This structure resembled more those of similar, but comparatively less hypersaline systems in Africa and Australia, than that of extreme hypersaline lagoons in Mexico or Araruama lagoon in a typically hypersaline year. Our findings indicate that increased contributions of planktivores and detritivores could be used as promising predictors of, respectively, salination and desalinisation processes and thus shifts in the ecosystem trophic state. Variations on the biomasses of piscivores and invertivores were apparently more related to short-term salinity changes among seasons and across the lagoon zones. Since the relationships between fish trophic structure and desalinisation and its associated effects were complex, long-term studies using complementary and integrative approaches, such as stable isotopes and functional traits, are recommended to confirm our findings for Araruama Lagoon and validate our hypothesis for other similar hypersaline ecosystems. (C) 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0272-7714
EI 1096-0015
PD OCT 31
PY 2018
VL 211
SI SI
BP 90
EP 99
DI 10.1016/j.ecss.2017.11.024
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000446148100008
ER

PT J
AU Franch-Gras, L
   Hahn, C
   Garcia-Roger, EM
   Carmona, MJ
   Serra, M
   Gomez, A
AF Franch-Gras, Lluis
   Hahn, Christoph
   Garcia-Roger, Eduardo M.
   Jose Carmona, Maria
   Serra, Manuel
   Gomez, Africa
TI Genomic signatures of local adaptation to the degree of environmental
   predictability in rotifers
SO SCIENTIFIC REPORTS
DT Article
ID FRESH-WATER ZOOPLANKTON; FLUCTUATING SELECTION; BRACHIONUS-PLICATILIS;
   ARABIDOPSIS-THALIANA; FUNCTIONAL GENOMICS; CLIMATE-CHANGE;
   DAPHNIA-MAGNA; EGG BANKS; POPULATION; EVOLUTIONARY
AB Environmental fluctuations are ubiquitous and thus essential for the study of adaptation. Despite this, genome evolution in response to environmental fluctuations -and more specifically to the degree of environmental predictability- is still unknown. Saline lakes in the Mediterranean region are remarkably diverse in their ecological conditions, which can lead to divergent local adaptation patterns in the inhabiting aquatic organisms. The facultatively sexual rotifer Brachionus plicatilis shows diverging local adaptation in its life-history traits in relation to estimated environmental predictability in its habitats. Here, we used an integrative approach-combining environmental, phenotypic and genomic data for the same populations-to understand the genomic basis of this diverging adaptation. Firstly, a novel draft genome for B. plicatilis was assembled. Then, genome-wide polymorphisms were studied using genotyping by sequencing on 270 clones from nine populations in eastern Spain. As a result, 4,543 high-quality SNPs were identified and genotyped. More than 90 SNPs were found to be putatively under selection with signatures of diversifying and balancing selection. Over 140 SNPs were correlated with environmental or phenotypic variables revealing signatures of local adaptation, including environmental predictability. Putative functions were associated to most of these SNPs, since they were located within annotated genes. Our results reveal associations between genomic variation and the degree of environmental predictability, providing genomic evidence of adaptation to local conditions in natural rotifer populations.
OI Serra, Manuel/0000-0003-1731-1529
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 2045-2322
PD OCT 30
PY 2018
VL 8
AR 16051
DI 10.1038/s41598-018-34188-y
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000448729400001
PM 30375419
ER

PT J
AU Ladds, MA
   Sibanda, N
   Arnold, R
   Dunn, MR
AF Ladds, Monique A.
   Sibanda, Nokuthaba
   Arnold, Richard
   Dunn, Matthew R.
TI Creating functional groups of marine fish from categorical traits
SO PEERJ
DT Article
DE Clustering; Traits; Fish; Missing data; Stability; Compactness;
   Separation; Connectedness; Teleost; Morphology
ID MISSING DATA; CLUSTER VALIDATION; ECOSYSTEM MODELS; GUILD APPROACH;
   HABITAT USE; DIVERSITY; MORPHOMETRICS; ASSEMBLAGES; IMPUTATION; ECOLOGY
AB Background. Functional groups serve two important functions in ecology: they allow for simplification of ecosystem models and can aid in understanding diversity. Despite their important applications, there has not been a universally accepted method of how to define them. A common approach is to duster species on a set of traits, validated through visual confirmation of resulting groups based primarily on expert opinion. The goal of this research is to determine a suitable procedure for creating and evaluating functional groups that arise from clustering nominal traits.
   Methods. To do so, we produced a species by trait matrix of 22 traits from 116 fish species from Tasman Bay and Golden Bay, New Zealand. Data collected from photographs and published literature were predominantly nominal, and a small number of continuous traits were discretized. Some data were missing, so the benefit of imputing data was assessed using four approaches on data with known missing values. Hierarchical clustering is utilised to search for underlying data structure in the data that may represent functional groups. Within this clustering paradigm there are a number of distance matrices and linkage methods available, several combinations of which we test. The resulting clusters are evaluated using internal metrics developed specifically for nominal clustering. This revealed the choice of number of dusters, distance matrix and linkage method greatly affected the overall within- and between- cluster variability. We visualise the clustering in two dimensions and the stability of dusters is assessed through bootstrapping.
   Results. Missing data imputation showed up to 90% accuracy using polytomous imputation, so was used to impute the real missing data. A division of the species information into three functional groups was the most separated, compact and stable result. Increasing the number of clusters increased the inconsistency of group membership, and selection of the appropriate distance matrix and linkage method improved the fit.
   Discussion. We show that the commonly used methodologies used for the creation of functional groups are fraught with subjectivity, ultimately causing significant variation in the composition of resulting groups. Depending on the research goal dictates the appropriate strategy for selecting number of groups, distance matrix and clustering algorithm combination.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 2167-8359
PD OCT 23
PY 2018
VL 6
AR e5795
DI 10.7717/peerj.5795
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000448082800009
PM 30370185
ER

PT J
AU Garcia, FC
   Bestion, E
   Warfield, R
   Yvon-Durocher, G
AF Garcia, Francisca C.
   Bestion, Elvire
   Warfield, Ruth
   Yvon-Durocher, Gabriel
TI Changes in temperature alter the relationship between biodiversity and
   ecosystem functioning
SO PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES OF THE UNITED STATES OF
   AMERICA
DT Article
DE warming; biodiversity; ecosystem function; traits; microbial ecology
ID SALMON SALMO-SALAR; GEOMAGNETIC REFERENCE FIELD; EURASIAN REED WARBLERS;
   ATLANTIC SALMON; MAGNETIC-FIELDS; POPULATION-STRUCTURE; ANIMAL
   NAVIGATION; OCEAN NAVIGATION; PACIFIC SALMON; MIGRATION
AB Global warming and the loss of biodiversity through human activities (e.g., land-use change, pollution, invasive species) are two of the most profound threats to the functional integrity of the Earth's ecosystems. These factors are, however, most frequently investigated separately, ignoring the potential for synergistic effects of biodiversity loss and environmental warming on ecosystem functioning. Here we use high-throughput experiments with microbial communities to investigate how changes in temperature affect the relationship between biodiversity and ecosystem functioning. We found that changes in temperature systematically altered the relationship between biodiversity and ecosystem functioning. As temperatures departed from ambient conditions the exponent of the diversity-functioning relationship increased, meaning that more species were required to maintain ecosystem functioning under thermal stress. This key result was driven by two processes linked to variability in the thermal tolerance curves of taxa. First, more diverse communities had a greater chance of including species with thermal traits that enabled them to maintain productivity as temperatures shifted from ambient conditions. Second, we found a pronounced increase in the contribution of complementarity to the net biodiversity effect at high and low temperatures, indicating that changes in species interactions played a critical role in mediating the impacts of temperature change on the relationship between biodiversity and ecosystem functioning. Our results highlight that if biodiversity loss occurs independently of species' thermal tolerance traits, then the additional impacts of environmental warming will result in sharp declines in ecosystem function.
OI Bestion, Elvire/0000-0001-5622-7907
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0027-8424
PD OCT 23
PY 2018
VL 115
IS 43
BP 10989
EP 10999
DI 10.1073/pnas.1805518115
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000448040500063
PM 30297403
ER

PT J
AU Ward, BA
   Wilson, JD
   Death, RM
   Monteiro, FM
   Yool, A
   Ridgwell, A
AF Ward, Ben A.
   Wilson, Jamie D.
   Death, Ros M.
   Monteiro, Fanny M.
   Yool, Andrew
   Ridgwell, Andy
TI EcoGEnIE 1.0: plankton ecology in the cGEnIE Earth system model
SO GEOSCIENTIFIC MODEL DEVELOPMENT
DT Article
ID OCEAN BIOGEOCHEMISTRY MODELS; GENERAL-CIRCULATION MODEL; DATA-BASED
   OPTIMIZATION; NORTH-ATLANTIC; CARBON-CYCLE; GLOBAL OCEAN; INTERMEDIATE
   COMPLEXITY; ECOSYSTEM MODEL; WORLD-OCEAN; 1D-ECOSYSTEM MODEL
AB We present an extension to the carbon-centric Grid Enabled Integrated Earth system model (cGEnIE) that explicitly accounts for the growth and interaction of an arbitrary number of plankton species. The new package (ECOGEM) replaces the implicit, flux-based parameterisation of the plankton community currently employed, with explicitly resolved plankton populations and ecological dynamics. In ECOGEM, any number of plankton species, with ecophysiological traits (e.g. growth and grazing rates) assigned according to organism size and functional group (e.g. phyto-plankton and zooplankton) can be incorporated at runtime. We illustrate the capability of the marine ecology enabled Earth system model (EcoGEnIE) by comparing results from one configuration of ECOGEM (with eight generic phyto-plankton and zooplankton size classes) to climatological and seasonal observations. We find that the new ecological components of the model show reasonable agreement with both global-scale climatological and local-scale seasonal data. We also compare EcoGEnIE results to the existing biogeochemical incarnation of cGEnIE. We find that the resulting globalscale distributions of phosphate, iron, dissolved inorganic carbon, alkalinity, and oxygen are similar for both iterations of the model. A slight deterioration in some fields in EcoGEnIE (relative to the data) is observed, although we make no attempt to re-tune the overall marine cycling of carbon and nutrients here. The increased capabilities of EcoGEnIE in this regard will enable future exploration of the ecological community on much longer timescales than have previously been examined in global ocean ecosystem models and particularly for past climates and global biogeochemical cycles.
RI Yool, Andrew/B-4799-2012
OI Yool, Andrew/0000-0002-9879-2776; Ridgwell, Andy/0000-0003-2333-0128;
   Wilson, Jamie/0000-0001-7509-4791
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1991-959X
EI 1991-9603
PD OCT 18
PY 2018
VL 11
IS 10
BP 4241
EP 4267
DI 10.5194/gmd-1111-4241-20182018
SC Geology
UT WOS:000447748000001
ER

PT J
AU Paz, H
   Vega-Ramos, F
   Arreola-Villa, F
AF Paz, Horacio
   Vega-Ramos, Flor
   Arreola-Villa, Felipe
TI Understanding hurricane resistance and resilience in tropical dry forest
   trees: A functional traits approach
SO FOREST ECOLOGY AND MANAGEMENT
DT Article
DE Fast-slow trade-off; Plant functional traits; Hurricane resistance and
   resilience; Tropical dry forest
ID WIND DAMAGE; PUERTO-RICO; CARIBBEAN HURRICANES; ECONOMICS SPECTRUM;
   NORTH QUEENSLAND; MOIST-FOREST; RECOVERY; DISTURBANCE; ECOSYSTEMS;
   WORLDWIDE
AB Understanding hurricane resistance and resilience in tree species is a challenge to the management and conservation of coastal tropical forests. Tree responses to hurricanes partly depend on species attributes related to architecture and resource use strategy; however, few studies have used multiple traits to identify the role of functional trade-offs in tree resistance and resilience. In this study, we apply a functional traits approach to explore how characteristics involved in tree shape, size and function influence the type and severity of damage by hurricane winds, and examine the potential for recovery by re-sprouting. We tested the hypothesis that traits involved in the fast-slow trade-off mediate tree responses to hurricanes. Eighteen months after the passing of a category 2 hurricane, we assessed the damage types found in 993 trees of dbh > 10 cm, from 36 dominant tree species in a tropical dry forest on the Mexican Pacific coast that was impacted by the event, and measured five functional traits related to species size, architecture and resource acquisition strategy. In addition, the sectional area recovered by re-sprouting in main tree trunks or branches was measured in 16 species. The results indicated that several traits could serve as good indicators of resistance and resilience. Maximum height, wood density and specific leaf area correlated positively with severe damage (together accounting for up to 47% of the variance in uprooting). In turn, re-sprouting recovery was positively associated with maximum height and specific leaf area but negatively with wood density and slenderness (together informing ca. 50% of the variance). We found evidence that the fast-slow continuum of resource use strategies can mediate the capacity of trees to resist and recover following hurricane winds; however, contrary to expectation, the consequences of the fast-slow syndrome for the response to hurricanes seem to vary with the axis of plant strategies considered. Our results challenge the notion that dense-wooded trees of the tropical dry forest should resist hurricanes better, and suggest that these climatic events may actually favor light-wooded, wide-stemmed trees.
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0378-1127
EI 1872-7042
PD OCT 15
PY 2018
VL 426
BP 115
EP 122
DI 10.1016/j.foreco.2018.03.052
SC Forestry
UT WOS:000439400500012
ER

PT J
AU Suazo-Ortuno, I
   Benitez-Malvido, J
   Marroquin-Paramo, J
   Soto, Y
   Siliceo, H
   Alvarado-Diaz, J
AF Suazo-Ortuno, Ireri
   Benitez-Malvido, Julieta
   Marroquin-Paramo, Jorge
   Soto, Yunuen
   Siliceo, Hugo
   Alvarado-Diaz, Javier
TI Resilience and vulnerability of herpetofaunal functional groups to
   natural and human disturbances in a tropical dry forest
SO FOREST ECOLOGY AND MANAGEMENT
DT Article
DE Amphibians; Functional traits; Hurricane; Tropical dry forest; Reptiles
ID WESTERN MEXICO; COMMUNITY COMPOSITION; SUCCESSIONAL STAGES;
   BIODIVERSITY; CONSERVATION; ASSEMBLAGES; DIVERSITY; AREAS; LAND
AB Natural and anthropogenic disturbances alter animal populations in complex ways. Shifts in population size and taxonomic species diversity as such may not always completely reflect the effects of forest disturbance on faunal communities. In this study, we used a functional ecological approach to detect resilient and vulnerable species including anurans (frogs and toads), lizards and snakes, after Hurricane Jova hit the Pacific Coast of Mexico in 2011. Using population abundances, we compared functional traits including habitat preference, body size and reproductive type of the herpetofauna inhabiting tropical dry forest vegetation under a chronosequence of successional stages: active pastures, 0 y; early-forests, 5-6 y; young-forests, 8-10; intermediate-forests 15-17 y; and old-growth continuous forests. A total of 4093 individuals representing 17 species of anurans, 18 lizard species and 25 snake species were recorded. Overall, successional stage and Hurricane Jova affected the number of anurans and lizards in contrasting ways. For example, while the total number of anurans declined significantly after the hurricane in all successional stages (from 736 to 512 individuals), lizard populations significantly increased (from 1084 to 1612), except in old-growth forests. In contrast, neither disturbance type significantly affected the density of snakes (from 81 to 69). Regarding functional traits, there were complex trajectories of change in species abundances according to successional stage after the hurricane. For lizards, abundance within different functional traits was correlated with the chronosequence after Hurricane Jova. Density of terrestrial and medium-sized lizard species increased with successional age, while arboreal and small-sized lizards decreased. For anurans, terrestrial and large-sized species declined elsewhere, while medium- and small-sized species increased in pastures after Hurricane Jova. Furthermore, riparian frogs with aquatic reproduction were recorded only in pastures. The herpetofauna of the tropical dry forest on the Pacific Coast of Mexico is composed of a mixture of species resilient and/or vulnerable to the synergetic impact of human and natural disturbances. Under the present scenario of land-use and land-cover change, therefore, the preservation of old-growth forest tracts in the human-dominated landscape of the study region is extremely important.
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0378-1127
EI 1872-7042
PD OCT 15
PY 2018
VL 426
BP 145
EP 157
DI 10.1016/j.foreco.2017.09.041
SC Forestry
UT WOS:000439400500015
ER

PT J
AU Teichert, N
   Lepage, M
   Lobry, J
AF Teichert, Nils
   Lepage, Mario
   Lobry, Jeremy
TI Beyond classic ecological assessment: The use of functional indices to
   indicate fish assemblages sensitivity to human disturbance in estuaries
SO SCIENCE OF THE TOTAL ENVIRONMENT
DT Article
DE Estuary; Fish assemblage; Local disturbance; Functional traits;
   Functional redundancy; Ecological status
ID CLIMATE-CHANGE; ANTHROPOGENIC DISTURBANCE; SPECIES DISTRIBUTION;
   TRANSITIONAL WATERS; HABITAT DEGRADATION; ECOSYSTEM SERVICES; FRENCH
   ESTUARIES; QUALITY STATUS; DIVERSITY; FRAMEWORK
AB Assessing ecological health of aquatic ecosystems is crucial in the current context of biodiversity loss to guide and prioritize management actions. Although several fish-based indices were developed to assess the ecological status of estuarine ecosystems, they do not provide guidance on the causal responses of communities to disturbances. The functional trait-based approach provides an understanding of how human disturbance affects the composition of biological and ecological traits in assemblages, as well as their consequences for ecosystem functioning. Here, we evaluate the responses of fish assemblages to human disturbance in 30 French estuaries using several taxonomic and functional indices (e.g. diversity, evenness or redundancy). We tested whether these indices can provide additional information on the human impacts and health of assemblages that are not reflected by the ecological indicator (fish-based index ELFI). Results indicated that high values of local human disturbances were associated to a decrease in fish abundance, decrease in species richness and reduced functional redundancy, whereas taxonomic and functional evenness increased. In contrast, the functional richness remained stable suggesting that the functional traits of species removed by stressors were maintained by more tolerant species. Indeed, we found that the local disturbances mainly resulted in a decrease in the proportions of small benthic species feeding on macro-invertebrates, which were dominant in the studied estuaries. Some functional alterations were detected by the fish-based index, but the decline of functional redundancy was not reflected, highlighting a serious concern for management. Indeed, the abrupt collapse of functional redundancy in response to local disturbances can decrease the ability of assemblages to maintain certain species traits in the face of future environmental disturbance, including climate change. From a management perspective, the application of such functional redundancy measure in monitoring programs can help stakeholders identify sensitive areas where conservation efforts need to be planned. (c) 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
RI Lepage, Mario/J-7110-2012
OI Lepage, Mario/0000-0002-8996-5305; Teichert, Nils/0000-0002-8873-9613
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0048-9697
EI 1879-1026
PD OCT 15
PY 2018
VL 639
BP 465
EP 475
DI 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.05.179
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000436806200045
PM 29800840
ER

PT J
AU Diab, M
   Mokari, T
AF Diab, Mahmud
   Mokari, Taleb
TI Bioinspired Hierarchical Porous Structures for Engineering Advanced
   Functional Inorganic Materials
SO ADVANCED MATERIALS
DT Article
DE 3D structures; diatoms; foraminifera; inorganic nanomaterials;
   microorganism scaffolds
ID PRESERVING REACTIVE CONVERSION; DIATOM FRUSTULES; MICROLENS ARRAYS;
   ROOM-TEMPERATURE; DRUG-DELIVERY; MARINE DIATOM; BIOSILICA;
   NANOPARTICLES; SILICA; MICROSHELLS
AB Tremendous efforts have been directed at designing functional and well-defined 3D structures in recent decades. Many approaches have been devised and are currently used to create 3D structures, including lithography, 3D printing, assembly, and template-mediated (natural or synthetic) methods. Natural scaffolds offer some unique traits, as compared to their artificial counterparts, presenting highly ordered, porous, identical, abundant, and diverse structures. Various organisms, such as viruses, bacteria, diatoms, foraminifera, and others, are used as templates to form 3D structures. Herein, advancements made in using the shell of marine microorganisms, diatoms, and foraminifera, as scaffolds for designing functional 3D structures are reported. Furthermore, a succinct overview of various synthetic methods used to coat these scaffolds with inorganic materials (i.e., metals, metal oxides, and metal sulfides) is provided. Finally, the use of such fabricated functional 3D structures in a wide range of applications, such as catalysis, sensing, drug delivery, photo-electrochemical uses, batteries, and others, is considered.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0935-9648
EI 1521-4095
PD OCT 11
PY 2018
VL 30
IS 41
SI SI
AR 1706349
DI 10.1002/adma.201706349
SC Chemistry; Science & Technology - Other Topics; Materials Science;
   Physics
UT WOS:000446551300008
PM 29923350
ER

PT J
AU Dissanayake, NG
   Frid, CLJ
   Drylie, TP
   Caswell, BA
AF Dissanayake, Navodha G.
   Frid, Christopher L. J.
   Drylie, Tarn P.
   Caswell, Bryony A.
TI Ecological functioning of mudflats: global analysis reveals both
   regional differences and widespread conservation of functioning
SO MARINE ECOLOGY PROGRESS SERIES
DT Article
DE Functional redundancy; Biodiversity; Biogeographic trends; Biological
   traits; Latitudinal variations; Resilience; Environmental management
ID SPECIES RICHNESS PATTERNS; BIOLOGICAL TRAITS; LATITUDINAL VARIATION;
   COMMUNITY STRUCTURE; DIVERSITY PATTERNS; MARINE ECOSYSTEM; FRESH-WATER;
   BIODIVERSITY; REDUNDANCY; SEDIMENT
AB Mudflats-unvegetated, soft-sediment, intertidal habitats-support macrofaunal assemblages that contribute to a number of important ecosystem functions (e.g. food for fish and birds, nutrient and C-cycling). These habitats are widespread but are threatened by increasing pressure from anthropogenic activities. Greater knowledge of the consequences of biodiversity loss for the functioning of ecosystems can aid management, by identifying potential threats. Systematic searches of the Web of Science and SCOPUS identified 163 published datasets of essentially 'pristine' mudflat macrofaunal assemblages, comprising data on 448 taxa from 4 climatic zones and 10 biogeographic regions. Broad-scale patterns of trait distribution confirmed established patterns showing that taxa at low latitudes have smaller body sizes, shorter life spans and more taxa have exoskeletons, and that direct developmental modes are more prevalent at high latitudes. Greater occurrences of burrow dwellers in the temperate zone may support greater rates of sediment turnover, organic matter de composition and nutrient cycling, whereas in the tropics, tube dwellers provide more biogenic habitat. Despite these trait differences, the overall similarity in trait composition relative to taxonomic composition indicated that globally, mudflats are functionally similar. The functional redundancy observed across regional and climatic boundaries suggests that ecosystem functioning and service delivery will show some resilience in the face of perturbation. However, the growing anthropogenic pressures on coastal mudflats means the risk of system collapse, beyond resilience thresholds, is high. This study illustrates how an extensive body of published literature can provide a foundation for developing a global understanding of ecological functioning in mudflats to inform management responses. The prevalence of crustaceans, such as fiddler crabs, in tropical mudflats can provide functional equivalence to the burrowing worms of temperate regions.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0171-8630
EI 1616-1599
PD OCT 4
PY 2018
VL 604
BP 1
EP 20
DI 10.3354/meps12728
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology;
   Oceanography
UT WOS:000446470100001
ER

PT J
AU Kristensen, E
   Roy, H
   Debrabant, K
   Valdemarsen, T
AF Kristensen, Erik
   Roy, Hans
   Debrabant, Kristian
   Valdemarsen, Thomas
TI Carbon oxidation and bioirrigation in sediments along a
   Skagerrak-Kattegat-Belt Sea depth transect
SO MARINE ECOLOGY PROGRESS SERIES
DT Article
DE Electron acceptor; Carbon oxidation; Benthic fauna; Bioirrigation; Metal
   oxides; Diagenetic modelling
ID PORE-WATER TRANSPORT; ORGANIC-MATTER; MARINE-SEDIMENTS; IRON REDUCTION;
   NORTH-SEA; NEREIS-DIVERSICOLOR; SULFATE REDUCTION; AQUATIC SEDIMENTS;
   MANGANESE REDUCTION; COMMUNITY STRUCTURE
AB Partitioning of electron acceptors and macrofaunal bioirrigation were assessed in sediments from 4 stations along a Skagerrak-Kattegat-Belt Sea depth transect. Sediment was examined for benthic fauna composition and abundance, sediment-water fluxes (O-2, dissolved inorganic carbon [DIC], NH4+, and NO3-), anaerobic reactions (carbon oxidation [C-ox], sulfate reduction [SR], manganese reduction [MnR], iron reduction [FeR], and ammonification [N-min]), porewater profiles (O-2, DIC, SO42- and NH4+), and solid phase profiles (organic content, Fe and Mn). Deep stations had less than half the abundance of benthic fauna than shallow stations, while the Belt Sea station was azoic due to bottom-water hypoxia. Solute fluxes and anaerobic reactions showed order-of-magnitude lower rates in sediment from deep than from shallow water. In general, anaerobic C-ox in sediments along the Skagerrak-Kattegat-Belt Sea transect is dominated by SR (>50%) in shallow water and decreases gradually when moving into deeper water and reaches 0 at similar to 700 m depth. FeR increases from 0 in shallow water to similar to 50% at similar to 600 m, but rapidly reaches 0 again at 700 m. MnR is close to 0 down to at least 500 m and increases to complete dominance at 700 m. The contribution of denitrification is generally below 10% at all depths. Bioirrigation-quantified as non-local exchange through diagenetic modelling-is proportional to fauna bio-mass and functional traits. The Br- tracer approach to determine bioirrigation on newly extracted sediment onboard a ship is not recommended. It is concluded that enhanced downward trans location of O-2 into anoxic sediment through bioirrigation is the major mechanism reoxidizing subsurface metals in the deep Skagerrak and Kattegat.
OI Roy, Hans/0000-0002-6477-3091; Kristensen, Erik/0000-0001-7259-0132
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0171-8630
EI 1616-1599
PD OCT 4
PY 2018
VL 604
BP 33
EP 50
DI 10.3354/meps12734
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology;
   Oceanography
UT WOS:000446470100003
ER

PT J
AU Talaber, I
   France, J
   Flander-Putrle, V
   Mozetic, P
AF Talaber, Iva
   France, Janja
   Flander-Putrle, Vesna
   Mozetic, Patricija
TI Primary production and community structure of coastal phytoplankton in
   the Adriatic Sea: insights on taxon-specific productivity
SO MARINE ECOLOGY PROGRESS SERIES
DT Article
DE Phytoplankton; Photosynthetic pigments; Primary production; Chl
   a-normalized primary production; Nutrients; Coastal sea
ID GULF-OF-TRIESTE; INDUCED XANTHOPHYLL CYCLE; MARINE-PHYTOPLANKTON;
   NUTRIENT LIMITATION; VERTICAL MIGRATION; CAROTENOID PATTERN; SPRING
   BLOOM; GROWTH; LIGHT; CHLOROPHYLL
AB We examined the relationship between phytoplankton primary production, biomass and community structure in a 2-year in situ survey in a predominantly bottom-up limited coastal sea (Gulf of Trieste, Adriatic Sea). Our results suggest that nutrient supply primarily shapes the phytoplankton community structure, which in turn governs the magnitude of primary production through the relative contribution of different phytoplankton groups and their group-specific chl a-normalized primary production. Non-metric multidimensional scaling analysis with superposed thin plate regression splines was used to relate chl a-normalized primary production with each phytoplankton group, of which cyanobacteria were associated with the highest and diatoms with the lowest chl a-normalized primary production (> 5 and 1-2 mg C [mg chl a](-1) h(-1), respectively). However, both groups were associated with periods of high primary production, highlighting the taxonomic differences in phytoplankton functional traits. Annual primary production for the years 2010 and 2011, characterized by different nutrient availability especially during summer, was estimated at 87.4 and 60.2 g C m(-2), respectively. Hence, even short-lived freshwater pulses during the annual irradiance maximum, sustaining a diatom-dominated assemblage rich in biomass, can substantially increase the annual primary production.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0171-8630
EI 1616-1599
PD OCT 4
PY 2018
VL 604
BP 65
EP 81
DI 10.3354/meps12721
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology;
   Oceanography
UT WOS:000446470100005
ER

PT J
AU Sorokin, DY
   Messina, E
   La Cono, V
   Ferrero, M
   Ciordia, S
   Mena, MC
   Toshchakov, SV
   Golyshin, PN
   Yakimoy, MM
AF Sorokin, Dimitry Y.
   Messina, Enzo
   La Cono, Violetta
   Ferrero, Manuel
   Ciordia, Sergio
   Mena, Maria C.
   Toshchakov, Stepan, V
   Golyshin, Peter N.
   Yakimoy, Michail M.
TI Sulfur Respiration in a Group of Facultatively Anaerobic Natronoarchaea
   Ubiquitous in Hypersaline Soda Lakes
SO FRONTIERS IN MICROBIOLOGY
DT Article
DE polysulfide reductase; haloarchaea; hypersaline soda lakes; sulfur
   respiration; hydrogenase; CISM; molybdopterin oxidoreductases;
   facultative anaerobic
ID KULUNDA STEPPE ALTAI; HALOPHILIC ARCHAEA; DEEP-SEA; SP-NOV.;
   AZOTOBACTER-BEIJERINCKII; PHYLOGENETIC DIVERSITY; NIFE HYDROGENASES;
   LIFE-STYLE; RNA GENES; RED-SEA
AB The ubiquity of strictly anaerobic sulfur-respiring haloarchaea in hypersaline systems with circumneutral pH has shaken a traditional concept of this group as predominantly aerobic heterotrophs. Here, we demonstrated that this functional group of haloarchaea also has its representatives in hypersaline alkaline lakes. Sediments from various hypersaline soda lakes showed high activity of sulfur reduction only partially inhibited by antibiotics. Eight pure cultures of sulfur-reducing natronoarchaea were isolated from such sediments using formate and butyrate as electron donors and sulfur as an electron acceptor. Unlike strict anaerobic haloarchaea, these novel sulfur-reducing natronoarchaea are facultative anaerobes, whose metabolic capabilities were inferred from cultivation experiments and genomic/proteomic reconstruction. While sharing many physiological traits with strict anaerobic haloarchaea, following metabolic distinctions make these new organisms be successful in both anoxic and aerobic habitats: the recruiting of heme-copper quinol oxidases as terminal electron sink in aerobic respiratory chain and the utilization of formate, hydrogen or short-chain fatty acids as electron donors during anaerobic growth with elemental sulfur. Obtained results significantly advance the emerging concept of halo(natrono)archaea as important players in the anaerobic sulfur and carbon cycling in various salt-saturated habitats.
OI Golyshin, Peter/0000-0002-5433-0350
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1664-302X
PD OCT 2
PY 2018
VL 9
AR 2359
DI 10.3389/fmicb.2018.02359
SC Microbiology
UT WOS:000446079300001
PM 30333814
ER

PT J
AU Olivier, D
   Loiseau, N
   Petatan-Ramirez, D
   Milian, OT
   Suarez-Castillo, AN
   Torre, J
   Munguia-Vega, A
   Reyes-Bonilla, H
AF Olivier, Damien
   Loiseau, Nicolas
   Petatan-Ramirez, David
   Trujillo Milian, Oscar
   Suarez-Castillo, Alvin N.
   Torre, Jorge
   Munguia-Vega, Adrian
   Reyes-Bonilla, Hector
TI Functional-biogeography of the reef fishes of the islands of the Gulf of
   California: Integrating functional divergence into marine conservation
SO GLOBAL ECOLOGY AND CONSERVATION
DT Article
DE Biodiversity; Biologically important area; Functional traits; Marine
   protected area; Sea of Cortez; Tropical Eastern Pacific
ID ECOSYSTEM FUNCTION; SPECIES RICHNESS; ROCKY REEFS; DIVERSITY;
   BIODIVERSITY; REDUNDANCY; REGIONALIZATION; VULNERABILITY; COMMUNITIES;
   FRAMEWORK
AB The Gulf of California (GC) is a semi-closed sea in the Tropical Eastern Pacific and is recognised as a highly diverse marine ecosystem. Despite this status, this region is still poorly studied in comparison to other marine hotspots. To start filling this gap, we attempt to provide a global overview of reef-fish diversity around the numerous islands of the region. We evaluated species richness, the abundance and biomass, and the functional diversity of the fish assemblages for the major islands of the GC. We first highlight that the southwestern part of the central GC is the hotspot of reef-fishes diversity within the GC, in terms of species richness, functional diversity, and fish abundance. We then found out an important functional divergence between fish assemblages of northern and southern regions. The fish biomass of each region is dominated by different species, characterised by different ecological traits (the opposite of functional convergence). This functional divergence may be explained by an important oceanographic heterogeneity along the latitudinal axis of the GC. The northern part shows larger climate fluctuations while the southern part is more tropical and climatically stable. Such functional divergence is a biodiversity facet to take into account when determining the sites to focus conservation action. In the GC, this criterion allows the importance of some sites to be highlighted to preserve the legacy of the reef-fishes, despite their lower diversity levels. (C) 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 2351-9894
PD OCT
PY 2018
VL 16
AR e00506
DI 10.1016/j.gecco.2018.e00506
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000454994500062
ER

PT J
AU Gomes, WIA
   Jovem-Azevedo, DD
   Paiva, FF
   Milesi, SV
   Molozzi, J
AF Ananias Gomes, Wilma Izabelly
   Jovem-Azevedo, Daniele da Silva
   Paiva, Franciely Ferreira
   Milesi, Silvia Vendruscolo
   Molozzi, Joseline
TI Functional attributes of Chironomidae for detecting anthropogenic
   impacts on reservoirs: A biomonitoring approach
SO ECOLOGICAL INDICATORS
DT Article
DE Anthropic disturbance; Diptera; Environmental quality; Trophic
   conditions
ID LIFE-HISTORY STRATEGIES; SPECIES TRAITS; BIOLOGICAL TRAITS;
   MACROINVERTEBRATE COMMUNITIES; INVERTEBRATE TRAITS; TROPICAL RESERVOIRS;
   STREAM; INTEGRITY; INDEX; ASSEMBLAGES
AB Organisms display sets of functional attributes that reflect local environmental conditions and can be used in environmental quality assessments. We analyzed the functional attributes of Chironomidae in reservoirs in the Brazilian semiarid region with different levels of anthropic disturbances. We examined the relationships of functional feeding groups, feeding strategies, body size, and the morphological adaptations of chironomid larvae with the environmental quality of 94 sites. The sites were classified according to their levels of anthropic disturbance based on environmental characteristics. To observe the relationship between the functional attributes of Chironomidae and the different levels of anthropic disturbance, we performed an RLQ. To test differences between the functional categories of Chironomidae, we use an analysis of variance (ANOVA). The functional categories of Chironomidae that indicated anthropic disturbances were: collector group, reduced pseudopods, abdominal tubule, and gatherers. The least disturbed sites showed higher relative abundances of engulfers, predators, organisms with elongated heads, and small body size. The observed relationships between Chironomid functional attributes and the levels of anthropic impacts on reservoirs in the semiarid region of Brazil allow their use as a tool for assessing the environmental qualities of lentic aquatic ecosystems.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1470-160X
EI 1872-7034
PD OCT
PY 2018
VL 93
BP 404
EP 410
DI 10.1016/j.ecolind.2018.05.006
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000452692600042
ER

PT J
AU Krynak, EM
   Yates, AG
AF Krynak, Edward M.
   Yates, Adam G.
TI Benthic invertebrate taxonomic and trait associations with land use in
   an intensively managed watershed: Implications for indicator
   identification
SO ECOLOGICAL INDICATORS
DT Article
DE Agricultural gradient; Benthic macroinvertebrates; Indicators; Land-use;
   Traits; Thresholds; Southern Ontario
ID SPECIES TRAITS; MACROINVERTEBRATE COMMUNITIES; ENVIRONMENTAL THRESHOLDS;
   FUNCTIONAL INDICATORS; ECOLOGICAL THRESHOLDS; BIOLOGICAL TRAITS; CURRENT
   KNOWLEDGE; BIOTIC INTEGRITY; FINE SEDIMENT; STREAM
AB Expansion and intensification of human land uses has resulted in the loss of all but remnant areas of natural cover over increasingly vast areas of land. Effective stream assessment in these regions thus requires indicators sensitive to ecosystem change in systems that are already highly stressed. The goal of this study was to determine if benthic macroinvertebrate communities in streams exposed to extensive anthropogenic stress are associated with land-use variables and demonstrate potential to be used as bioindicators for assessment of further land use modification. Using the Grand River in southern Ontario as our model, we sampled for benthic macro invertebrates in 70 small (3-20 km(2)) sub-watersheds that comprised a gradient of intensive land use (65-100% developed). Redundancy analysis and variance partitioning results indicated that macroinvertebrate taxonomy and traits were only weakly associated with environmental gradients with the strongest associations occurring at the reach scale. With strong anthropogenic filters present across the watershed, it is likely that the majority of benthic macroinvertebrate communities in the Grand River have experienced a homogenization towards tolerant taxa and traits that respond more to local habitat variables. Threshold Indicator Taxa Analysis (TITAN) revealed 19 valid taxa indicators and 32 valid trait indicators for one or more of six environmental variables (percent sub-watershed agriculture, percent buffer agriculture, pool substrate, sediment reduction, natural channel, and riparian width). However, individual taxon and community change points exhibited broad quantile scores indicating a gradual or random response to environmental variables. Comparison of traits and taxonomic associations with environmental variables showed minimal difference suggesting traits may not offer increased sensitivity to land-use stress. However, several traits did show potential to serve as diagnostic indicators for specific stressors associated with agricultural land use. Our ability to identify even a few indicators in a region with intensive human activity is promising for land managers charged with detecting biotic alterations in this stressed system. Further research developing indicators sensitive to intensification of anthropogenic stress in extensively developed landscapes is critical to ensuring managers have the tools needed to protect and enhance aquatic resources.
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 1470-160X
EI 1872-7034
PD OCT
PY 2018
VL 93
BP 1050
EP 1059
DI 10.1016/j.ecolind.2018.06.002
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000452692600103
ER

PT J
AU Davies, KTJ
   Bennett, NC
   Faulkes, CG
   Rossiter, SJ
AF Davies, Kalina T. J.
   Bennett, Nigel C.
   Faulkes, Chris G.
   Rossiter, Stephen J.
TI Limited Evidence for Parallel Molecular Adaptations Associated with the
   Subterranean Niche in Mammals: A Comparative Study of Three Superorders
SO MOLECULAR BIOLOGY AND EVOLUTION
DT Article
DE convergent evolution; subterranean; mammals; selection; adaptation
ID RATS HETEROCEPHALUS-GLABER; CONVERGENT EVOLUTION; MOLE-RAT; MARINE
   MAMMALS; GENOME-WIDE; HIGH-ALTITUDE; GENES; HEARING; CANCER; LIFE
AB Among mammals, several lineages have independently adapted to a subterranean niche and possess similar phenotypic traits for burrowing (e.g., cylindrical bodies, short limbs, and absent pinnae). Previous research on mole-rats has revealed molecular adaptations for coping with reduced oxygen, elevated carbon dioxide, and the absence of light. In contrast, almost nothing is known regarding molecular adaptations in other subterranean lineages (e.g., true moles and golden moles). Therefore, the extent to which the recurrent phenotypic adaptations of divergent subterranean taxa have arisen via parallel routes of molecular evolution remains untested. To address these issues, we analyzed similar to 8,000 loci in 15 representative subterranean taxa of four independent transitions to an underground niche for signatures of positive selection and convergent amino acid substitutions. Complementary analyses were performed in nonsubterranean "control" taxa to assess the biological significance of results. We found comparable numbers of positively selected genes in each of the four subterranean groups; however, correspondence in terms of gene identity between gene sets was low. Furthermore, we did not detect evidence of more convergent amino acids among subterranean species pairs compared with levels found between nonsubterranean controls. Comparisons with nonsubterranean taxa also revealed loci either under positive selection or with convergent substitutions, with similar functional enrichment (e.g., cell adhesion, immune response, and coagulation). Given the limited indication that positive selection and convergence occurred in the same loci, we conclude that selection may have acted on different loci across subterranean mammal lineages to produce similar phenotypes.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0737-4038
EI 1537-1719
PD OCT
PY 2018
VL 35
IS 10
BP 2544
EP 2559
DI 10.1093/molbev/msy161
SC Biochemistry & Molecular Biology; Evolutionary Biology; Genetics &
   Heredity
UT WOS:000452566800016
PM 30137400
ER

PT J
AU Record, NR
   Ji, RB
   Maps, F
   Varpe, O
   Runge, JA
   Petrik, CM
   Johns, D
AF Record, Nicholas R.
   Ji, Rubao
   Maps, Frederic
   Varpe, Oystein
   Runge, Jeffrey A.
   Petrik, Colleen M.
   Johns, David
TI Copepod diapause and the biogeography of the marine lipidscape
SO JOURNAL OF BIOGEOGRAPHY
DT Article
DE copepod; diapause; global biogeography; lipidscape; model; trait
ID NE NORWEGIAN SEA; CALANUS-FINMARCHICUS; LIFE-HISTORY; NORTH-ATLANTIC;
   RIGHT WHALE; VERTICAL-DISTRIBUTION; CARBON FLUX; ZOOPLANKTON; CLIMATE;
   GROWTH
AB Aim One of the primary characteristics that determines the structure and function of marine food webs is the utilization and prominence of energy-rich lipids. The biogeographical pattern of lipids throughout the ocean delineates the marine "lipidscape," which supports lipid-rich fish, mammal, and seabird communities. While the importance of lipids is well appreciated, there are no synoptic measurements or biogeographical estimates of the marine lipidscape. Productive lipid-rich food webs in the pelagic ocean depend on the critical diapause stage of large pelagic copepods, which integrate lipid production from phytoplankton, concentrating it in space and time, and making it available to upper trophic levels as particularly energy-rich wax esters. As an important first step towards mapping the marine lipidscape, we compared four different modelling approaches of copepodid diapause, each representing different underlying hypotheses, and evaluated them against global datasets. Location Global Ocean. Taxon Copepoda. Methods Through a series of global model runs and data comparisons, we demonstrated the potential for regional studies to be extended to estimate global biogeographical patterns of diapause. We compared four modelling approaches each designed from a different perspective: life history, physiology, trait-based community ecology, and empirical relationships. We compared the resulting biogeographical patterns and evaluated the model results against global measurements of copepodid diapause.
   Results Models were able to resolve more than just the latitudinal pattern of diapause (i.e. increased diapause prevalence near the poles), but to also pick up a diversity of regions where diapause occurs, such as coastal upwelling zones and seasonal seas. The life history model provided the best match to global observations. The predicted global biogeographical patterns, combined with carbon flux estimates, suggested a lower bound of 0.031-0.25 Pg C yr(-1) of downward flux associated with copepodid diapause. Main conclusions Results indicated a promising path forward for representing a detailed biogeography of the marine lipidscape and its associated carbon flux in global ecosystem and climate models. While complex models may offer advantages in terms of reproducing details of community structure, simpler theoretically based models appeared to best reproduce broad-scale biogeographical patterns and showed the best correlation with observed biogeographical patterns.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0305-0270
EI 1365-2699
PD OCT
PY 2018
VL 45
IS 10
BP 2238
EP 2251
DI 10.1111/jbi.13414
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Physical Geography
UT WOS:000452234900002
ER

PT J
AU Zhang, XL
   Zhang, QQ
   Yang, AJ
   Hou, LJ
   Zheng, YL
   Zhai, WD
   Gong, J
AF Zhang, Xiaoli
   Zhang, Qianqian
   Yang, Anjing
   Hou, Lijun
   Zheng, Yanling
   Zhai, Weidong
   Gong, Jun
TI Incorporation of Microbial Functional Traits in Biogeochemistry Models
   Provides Better Estimations of Benthic Denitrification and Anammox Rates
   in Coastal Oceans
SO JOURNAL OF GEOPHYSICAL RESEARCH-BIOGEOSCIENCES
DT Article
DE biogeochemical oceanography; gene copy number ratio; modeling; nitrogen
   cycle; spatial and seasonal patterns
ID ANAEROBIC AMMONIUM OXIDATION; NITROUS-OXIDE REDUCTASE; 16S
   RIBOSOMAL-RNA; BOHAI SEA; YELLOW SEA; ORGANIC-MATTER; DENITRIFYING
   BACTERIA; NITRATE REDUCTION; NITRITE REDUCTASE; N-2 PRODUCTION
AB Marine benthic nitrogen (N) cycling may vary widely across space and seasons; it is thus needed to make high-resolution estimations of these important ecosystem processes with a reasonable number of variables. In this study, we determined the benthic denitrification and anammox potentials in two basins, the Bohai Sea and the North Yellow Sea of China in May and November, and evaluated models in predicting these functions with environmental factors and/or microbial gene-based functional traits. We found that denitrification generally dominated the N loss (54-98%), and that the denitrification rate varied greatly between basins and seasons. The anammox rate was generally higher in the Bohai Sea than in the North Yellow Sea in both seasons, and it made a greater contribution in November (22%) than in May (16%). Among the measured environmental factors, chlorophyll a in bottom waters and sedimentary organic carbon content were the most influential for predicting denitrification and anammox rates, respectively. On the other hand, the alpha diversities and gene abundances of involved bacteria were poorly correlated with the function potentials, indicating that these functional traits could not well explain the functions alone. Upon the incorporation of two gene copy number ratios [nosZ/(nirS+nirK) and nirK/bacterial 16S rRNA genes] into the environmental factor-parameterized models, however, we found that the predictive powers of the regression models for total N loss, denitrification and anammox rates, and contributions of anammox increased substantially, indicating that taking microbial functional traits into account could make estimations of these N-cycling functions in coastal ecosystems more accurate.
RI Gong, Jun/B-1580-2008
OI Gong, Jun/0000-0002-4402-1263
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 2169-8953
EI 2169-8961
PD OCT
PY 2018
VL 123
IS 10
BP 3331
EP 3352
DI 10.1029/2018JG004682
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Geology
UT WOS:000450721000017
ER

PT J
AU Higham, TE
   Seamone, SG
   Arnold, A
   Toews, D
   Janmohamed, Z
   Smith, SJ
   Rogers, SM
AF Higham, Timothy E.
   Seamone, Scott G.
   Arnold, Amanda
   Toews, Desiree
   Janmohamed, Zeanna
   Smith, Sara J.
   Rogers, Sean M.
TI The ontogenetic scaling of form and function in the spotted ratfish,
   Hydrolagus colliei (Chondrichthyes: Chimaeriformes): Fins, muscles, and
   locomotion
SO JOURNAL OF MORPHOLOGY
DT Article
DE allometry; drag; Holocephali; pectoral fin; pelvic fin; swimming
ID SUNFISH LEPOMIS-MACROCHIRUS; TROUT ONCORHYNCHUS-MYKISS; 3-DIMENSIONAL
   KINEMATICS; SWIMMING FISH; HYDRODYNAMIC FUNCTION; LABRIFORM PROPULSION;
   AQUATIC VERTEBRATES; CHIMAEROID FISHES; GAIT TRANSITION; PECTORAL FINS
AB The alteration of form and function through the life of a fish can have profound impacts on the ability to move through water. Although several studies have examined morphology and function in relation to body size, there is a paucity of data for chondrichthyans, an ancient group of fishes. Ratfishes are interesting in that they utilize flapping pectoral fins to drive movement, and they diverged from elasmobranchs early in the gnathostome phylogeny. Using the spotted ratfish, Hydrolagus colliei, we quantified the scaling of traits relevant for locomotion, including median and paired fin external anatomy, the musculature of the pectoral and pelvic fins, and the kinematics of the pectoral fins. Whereas pelvic fins scaled with either positive allometry (fin span and area) or isometry (fin chord length at the base of the fin), pectoral fin measurements either scaled with negative allometry (fin span and aspect ratio) or isometry (fin area and chord length). Correspondingly, all pelvic fin muscles exhibited positive allometry, whereas pectoral muscles exhibited a mix of isometric and positively allometric growth. Caudal fin area and body frontal area both scaled with positive allometry, whereas dorsal fin area and span scale with isometry. Pectoral fin amplitude during swimming exhibited isometry, and fin beat frequency decreased with body size. Our results highlight the complex changes in form and function throughout ontogeny. Finally, we highlight that hierarchical differentiation in morphology can occur during growth, potentially leading to complex changes in performance of a functional system.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0362-2525
EI 1097-4687
PD OCT
PY 2018
VL 279
IS 10
BP 1408
EP 1418
DI 10.1002/jmor.20876
SC Anatomy & Morphology
UT WOS:000450334800003
PM 30184247
ER

PT J
AU Liu, XS
   Liu, QH
   Zhang, Y
   Hua, E
   Zhang, ZN
AF Liu, Xiaoshou
   Liu, Qinghe
   Zhang, Yan
   Hua, Er
   Zhang, Zhinan
TI Effects of Yellow Sea Cold Water Mass on marine nematodes based on
   biological trait analysis
SO MARINE ENVIRONMENTAL RESEARCH
DT Article
DE Free-living marine nematode; Biological trait analysis; Meiofauna;
   Yellow Sea Cold Water Mass; Southern Yellow Sea
ID FREE-LIVING NEMATODES; ANALYSIS BTA; HUANGHAI SEA; SUBLITTORAL
   MEIOFAUNA; FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; MATURITY INDEX; NORTH-SEA; ASSEMBLAGES;
   COMMUNITIES; INDICATORS
AB The Yellow Sea Cold Water Mass (YSCWM) is a seasonal hydrological phenomenon with significant effects on benthic animals. Based on a range of biological traits, including feeding type, tail shape, adult body length, body shape and life history (c-p value), the biological trait analysis (BTA) of marine nematodes in the southern Yellow Sea was studied in June 2003 (summer) and January 2004 (winter) in order to reveal the effects of YSCWM on benthic animals. In terms of biological traits composition of marine nematode assemblages, results of ANOSIM showed that there were no significant differences among sites inside the YSCMW area. However, for spatial distribution, marine nematode assemblages showed significant differences between sites inside and outside of the YSCWM area in terms of body shape, as there was higher percentage of nematodes with slender body shape while lower percentage with stout and long thin body shape at the sites inside the YSCWM area. Results of BIOENV analysis showed that water depth and sediment silt-clay percentage were the most important factors contributed to the differences of biological traits of marine nematode assemblages in summer, while sediment phaeophorbide content best explained the differences of marine nematode assemblages in winter. The existence of the YSCWM may provide a stable environment for marine nematode assemblages, keeping them in a continuous state during the seasonal changes. The higher percentage of nematodes with slender body may be the response to the YSCWM.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0141-1136
EI 1879-0291
PD OCT
PY 2018
VL 141
BP 167
EP 185
DI 10.1016/j.marenvres.2018.08.013
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology;
   Toxicology
UT WOS:000450376700018
PM 30193934
ER

PT J
AU Renz, JR
   Powilleit, M
   Gogina, M
   Zettler, ML
   Morys, C
   Forster, S
AF Renz, J. R.
   Powilleit, M.
   Gogina, M.
   Zettler, M. L.
   Morys, C.
   Forster, S.
TI Community bioirrigation potential (BIPc), an index to quantify the
   potential for solute exchange at the sediment-water interface
SO MARINE ENVIRONMENTAL RESEARCH
DT Article
DE Baltic Sea; Macrofauna; Benthic community; Ecosystem function;
   Classification
ID POLYCHAETE FEEDING GUILDS; FUNCTIONAL-GROUP APPROACH; SOUTHWESTERN
   BALTIC SEA; NEREIS-DIVERSICOLOR; MARINE-SEDIMENTS; BIOGEOCHEMICAL
   PROCESSES; ECOSYSTEM ENGINEERS; PERMEABLE SEDIMENTS; FRESH-WATER;
   CALLIANASSA-SUBTERRANEA
AB Bioirrigation: the animal-induced exchange of solutes between pore water and overlying water - is a key process in sediments with profound implications for biogeochemical processes such as nutrient cycling and organic matter regeneration at the sediment water interface. There is an urgent need to understand how a changing environment will affect the irrigation activity of macrofauna and vice versa. A shift in species composition (e.g. from deep burrowing species to smaller, more opportunistic and shallow burrowing species) will have large effects on bioirrigation and thus on ecosystem function (such as benthic pelagic coupling). Considering the difficulties to determine area-covering rates of bioirrigation (e.g. in terms tracer-based fluxes) and the complexity of interactions of multiple species in the community that prohibit a direct measure of bioirrigation attributable to each species, a mechanistically-based approach is needed to predict relative intensities of bioirrigation activity based on the fundamental functional traits. We propose a conceptual framework to develop an index of bioirrigation that takes into account the biological mechanisms of bioirrigation and provides a simplified, yet functionally based approach to quantify the bioirrigation potential of benthic communities.
   We developed the community bioirrigation potential (BIPc) that provides a biomass- and abundance-weighted scoring system considering functional traits related to pore water and solute exchange. It may be used as a supplement to established methods to assess the function of marine soft sediments related bioirrigation. In analogy to the particle-related community bioturbation potential of Solan et al. (2004), context dependent organismal traits that affect ventilation and bioirrigation (feeding type, morphology of burrows, and burrowing depth) are combined with the data on abundance and biomass of the respective species. These are subsequently summed up to a community bioirrigation potential (BIPc).
   This review considers ecological traits relevant for bioirrigation and their classification into a bioirrigation index. Furthermore the necessary simplifications in the index (e.g. limiting its applicability to interfacial nutrient fluxes) are discussed. We also provide a working example from the southwestern Baltic Sea to illustrate the practical application of the index and a compilation of key species related to this area containing their classification into the considered bioirrigation traits.
OI Zettler, Michael Lothar/0000-0002-5437-5495
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0141-1136
EI 1879-0291
PD OCT
PY 2018
VL 141
BP 214
EP 224
DI 10.1016/j.marenvres.2018.09.013
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology;
   Toxicology
UT WOS:000450376700022
PM 30224085
ER

PT J
AU Vaikre, M
   Remm, L
   Rannap, R
   Voode, M
AF Vaikre, Maarja
   Remm, Liina
   Rannap, Riinu
   Voode, Margus
TI Functional Assemblages of Macroinvertebrates in Pools and Ditches in
   Drained Forest Landscape
SO WETLANDS
DT Article
DE Functional feeding groups; forestry drainage; temporary water bodies;
   drainage ditches
ID LENGTH-MASS RELATIONSHIPS; PERIPHYTON COMMUNITY; ARTIFICIAL-DRAINAGE;
   HEADWATER STREAM; FEEDING GROUPS; LEAF-LITTER; WATER; TERRESTRIAL;
   DIVERSITY; HABITAT
AB Artificially drained commercial forests are hydrologically novel ecosystems, where the array of aquatic habitats consists of ditches and remnant pools. In general the network of ditches has been found to have longer hydroperiod, the knowledge, however, about aquatic invertebrates in this system is scarce. We examined which environmental factors are impacting the biomass and abundance of functional feeding groups. Scrapers and shredders were aggregated to ditches and gatherers to pools. Filterers' distribution pattern suggested that the function of filtering is carried out by different taxa in pools and ditches. Ditches were rather more suitable for feeding groups that rely on autochthonous resources. Acidity was a major driver of functional community composition, for example, one of the causes for higher scraper frequency in ditches. Predators exhibited greater quantities in extensive macrophyte cover regardless of water body type. Our results suggest that the trophic organization in ditches and pools is different because habitat factors select the feeding groups directly through food resources, but also because of the environmental filter on the other biological traits of the organisms. To support complex ecosystems with several trophic levels also in commercial forests, we suggest to avoid destroying macrophyte rich pools and ditches during silvicultural management.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0277-5212
EI 1943-6246
PD OCT
PY 2018
VL 38
IS 5
BP 957
EP 964
DI 10.1007/s13157-018-1045-2
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000450305300009
ER

PT J
AU Catian, G
   da Silva, DM
   Suarez, YR
   Scremin-Dias, E
AF Catian, Gisele
   da Silva, Danilo Muniz
   Suarez, Yzel Rondon
   Scremin-Dias, Edna
TI Effects of Flood Pulse Dynamics on Functional Diversity of Macrophyte
   Communities in the Pantanal Wetland
SO WETLANDS
DT Article
DE Anatomical traits; Flood pulse; Habitat filtering; Ponds
ID WATER-LEVEL FLUCTUATIONS; PLANT-COMMUNITIES; SPECIES RICHNESS;
   RIVER-FLOODPLAIN; ENVIRONMENTAL GRADIENTS; ADAPTIVE SIGNIFICANCE;
   VEGETATION DIVERSITY; AQUATIC MACROPHYTES; RELATIVE IMPORTANCE; LAKES
AB Environmental variations and plant traits can act as a filter in plant communities, selecting better-adapted species. In wetlands, macrophytes display physiological, morphological and life history plasticity that allows them to adapt to flood dynamics reflecting habitat filtering. Our aim was to evaluate if the functional diversity of macrophytic community varies between the flood phases, noting whether water factors influence the functional diversity and whether the traits that denote adaptation are associated with these phases. We evaluated 11 morphological traits of macrophytes. The floristic survey within and on the edge of twenty ponds was carried out on a monthly basis and the water parameters were measured for two years. The functional diversity was lower in the drought' and increased over the flood cycle reaching maximum values in the water recession' phase. Drought' acted as a filter by selecting only a few adapted species and the water recession' acted as a transition area combining favourable conditions for the species of both dry and flood. The trait that contributed most to differentiate the functional groups was the life form. We conclude that the environments under spatial and temporal changes support different communities with different functional characteristics.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0277-5212
EI 1943-6246
PD OCT
PY 2018
VL 38
IS 5
BP 975
EP 991
DI 10.1007/s13157-018-1050-5
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000450305300011
ER

PT J
AU Pecuchet, L
   Reygondeau, G
   Cheung, WWL
   Licandro, P
   van Denderen, PD
   Payne, MR
   Lindegren, M
AF Pecuchet, Laurene
   Reygondeau, Gabriel
   Cheung, William W. L.
   Licandro, Priscilla
   van Denderen, P. Daniel
   Payne, Mark R.
   Lindegren, Martin
TI Spatial distribution of life-history traits and their response to
   environmental gradients across multiple marine taxa
SO ECOSPHERE
DT Article
DE community composition; copepod; environment; fish; habitat; infauna;
   multi-taxa; North Sea; trait
ID NORTH-SEA; FUNCTIONAL-RESPONSES; COMMUNITY ECOLOGY; BIOLOGICAL TRAITS;
   FISHING EFFORT; CLIMATE-CHANGE; PATTERNS; SIZE; BIOGEOGRAPHY; ECOSYSTEM
AB Trait-based approaches enable comparison of community composition across multiple organism groups. Yet, little is known about the degree to which empirical trait responses found for one taxonomic group can be generalized across organisms. In this study, we investigated the spatial variability of marine community-weighted mean traits and compared their environmental responses across multiple taxa and habitats, including pelagic zooplankton (copepods), demersal fish, and benthic infaunal invertebrates. We used extensive, spatially explicit datasets collected from scientific surveys in the North Sea and examined community composition of these groups using a trait-based approach. In order to cover the key biological characteristics of an organism, we considered three life-history traits (adult size, offspring size, and fecundity) and taxon-specific feeding traits. While many of the traits co-varied in space and notably demonstrated a south-north gradient, none of the traits showed a consistent spatial distribution across all groups. However, traits are often correlated as a result of trade-offs. When studying spatial patterns of multiple traits variability in fish and copepods, we showed a high spatial correlation. This also applied to a lesser extent to fish and benthic infauna, whereas no correlation was found between benthic infauna and copepods. The result suggested a decoupling in the community traits between strictly benthic and strictly pelagic species. The strongest drivers of spatial variability for many community traits are the gradients in temperature seasonality, primary productivity, fishing effort, and depth. Spatial variability in benthic traits also co-varied with descriptors of the seabed habitat. Overall, results showed that trait responses to environmental gradients cannot be generalized across organism groups, pointing toward potential complex responses of multi-taxa communities to environmental changes and highlighting the need for cross-habitat multi-trait analyses to foresee how environmental change will affect community structure and biodiversity at large.
RI Payne, Mark/C-6844-2008
OI Payne, Mark/0000-0001-5795-2481
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 2150-8925
PD OCT
PY 2018
VL 9
IS 10
AR e02460
DI 10.1002/ecs2.2460
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000449566200017
ER

PT J
AU Rincon-Diaz, MP
   Pittman, SJ
   Arismendi, I
   Heppell, SS
AF Rincon-Diaz, Martha Patricia
   Pittman, Simon J.
   Arismendi, Ivan
   Heppell, Selina S.
TI Functional diversity metrics detect spatio-temporal changes in the fish
   communities of a Caribbean marine protected area
SO ECOSPHERE
DT Article
DE Caribbean reefs; fish assemblages; functional diversity; resilience;
   spatio-temporal variation; trophic traits
ID CORAL-REEF FISH; US-VIRGIN-ISLANDS; SPECIES RICHNESS; STRUCTURAL
   COMPLEXITY; ECOSYSTEM FUNCTION; HABITAT DEGRADATION; RESPONSE DIVERSITY;
   RESILIENCE; ASSEMBLAGES; BIODIVERSITY
AB Functional diversity (FD) metrics quantify the trait diversity in biological assemblages and act as a proxy for the diverse ecological functions performed in the community. Analyses of FD offer a potentially useful tool to identify functional changes in diverse, complex, and disturbed marine ecosystems such as coral reefs, yet this metric is rarely applied to evaluate community change. Here, we documented spatio-temporal variability in the trophic function of fish assemblages to identify changes in coral reef communities inside the Buck Island Reef National Monument (BIRNM) in the U.S. Virgin Islands between 2002 and 2010, which included an intense coral bleaching event in 2005. We combined six trait categories related to the trophic function of 95 fish species together with species biomass estimated from underwater surveys to calculate assemblage-level descriptors of functional richness (FRic), dispersion (FDis), and evenness. We tested the effects of habitat type, time, and their interaction on fish FD using a non-parametric permutational multivariate analysis of variance. We found statistically significant differences for FRic and FDis between habitat types and survey years. Coral reef and other hard bottom areas supported highest levels of trophic functional richness and variation, but low functional redundancy. Fish species exhibited high functional uniqueness within the functional trait space suggesting that a significant decline in fish diversity in the BIRNM would likely result in loss of trophic functions from the fish community. Detection of temporal variations in functional trait composition subsequent to the mass coral bleaching event in 2005 indicates that FD descriptors are sensitive enough to track shifts in the emergent trophic organization of fish communities. In the BIRNM, the trophic organization in fish assemblages did not return to the pre-bleaching state even after five years of monitoring. We demonstrate a novel way to monitor resilience to disturbance by plotting and tracking the centroid of the functional trait space through time. Our findings demonstrate the utility of FD descriptors to evaluate changes to the functional integrity of diverse and spatially heterogeneous habitat structure across the seascape.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 2150-8925
PD OCT
PY 2018
VL 9
IS 10
AR e02433
DI 10.1002/ecs2.2433
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000449566200034
ER

PT J
AU Dezerald, O
   Srivastava, DS
   Cereghino, R
   Carrias, JF
   Corbara, B
   Farjalla, VF
   Leroy, C
   Marino, NAC
   Piccoli, GCO
   Richardson, BA
   Richardson, MJ
   Romero, GQ
   Gonzalez, AL
AF Dezerald, Olivier
   Srivastava, Diane S.
   Cereghino, Regis
   Carrias, Jean-Francois
   Corbara, Bruno
   Farjalla, Vinicius F.
   Leroy, Celine
   Marino, Nicholas A. C.
   Piccoli, Gustavo C. O.
   Richardson, Barbara A.
   Richardson, Michael J.
   Romero, Gustavo Q.
   Gonzalez, Angelica L.
TI Functional traits and environmental conditions predict community
   isotopic niches and energy pathways across spatial scales
SO FUNCTIONAL ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE energy pathways; environmental heterogeneity; food webs; functional
   biogeography; functional diversity; isotopic niche; metacommunity;
   trophic structure
ID TROPHIC STRUCTURE; DIVERSITY INDEXES; RATIOS PROVIDE; MIXING MODELS;
   WIDE MEASURES; ECOLOGY; DRIVERS; BIOGEOGRAPHY; ECOSYSTEMS; DELTA-C-13
AB 1. Despite ongoing research in food web ecology and functional biogeography, the links between food web structure, functional traits and environmental conditions across spatial scales remain poorly understood. Trophic niches, defined as the amount of energy and elemental space occupied by species and food webs, may help bridge this divide.
   2. Here, we ask how the functional traits of species, the environmental conditions of habitats and the spatial scale of analysis jointly determine the characteristics of trophic niches. We used isotopic niches as a proxy of trophic niches, and conducted analyses at spatial scales ranging from local food webs and metacommunities to geographically distant sites.
   3. We sampled aquatic macroinvertebrates from 104 tank bromeliads distributed across five sites from Central to South America and compiled the macroinvertebrates' functional traits and stable isotope values (delta N-15 and delta C-13). We assessed how isotopic niches within each bromeliad were influenced by the functional trait composition of their associated invertebrates and environmental conditions (i.e., habitat size, canopy cover [CC] and detrital concentration [DC]). We then evaluated whether the diet of dominant predators and, consequently, energy pathways within food webs reflected functional and environmental changes among bromeliads across sites. At last, we determined the extent to which the isotopic niches of macroinvertebrates within each bromeliad contributed to the metacommunity isotopic niches within each site and compared these metacommunity-level niches over biogeographic scales.
   4. At the bromeliad level, isotopic niches increased with the functional richness of species in the food web and the DC in the bromeliad. The diet of top predators tracked shifts in prey biomass along gradients of CC and DC. Bromeliads that grew under heterogeneous CC displayed less trophic redundancy and therefore combined to form larger metacommunity isotopic niches. At last, the size of metacommunity niches depended on within-site heterogeneity in CC.
   5. Our results suggest that the trophic niches occupied by food webs can predictably scale from local food webs to metacommunities to biogeographic regions. This scaling process is determined by both the functional traits of species and heterogeneity in environmental conditions.
RI Farjalla, Vinicius/G-4945-2010
OI Farjalla, Vinicius/0000-0003-4084-5983; Cereghino,
   Regis/0000-0003-3981-3159
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0269-8463
EI 1365-2435
PD OCT
PY 2018
VL 32
IS 10
BP 2423
EP 2434
DI 10.1111/1365-2435.13142
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000446322200014
ER

PT J
AU Cereghino, R
   Pillar, VD
   Srivastava, DS
   de Omena, PM
   MacDonald, AAM
   Barberis, IM
   Corbara, B
   Guzman, LM
   Leroy, C
   Bautista, FO
   Romero, GQ
   Trzcinski, MK
   Kratina, P
   Debastiani, VJ
   Goncalves, AZ
   Marino, NAC
   Farjalla, VF
   Richardson, BA
   Richardson, MJ
   Dezerald, O
   Gilbert, B
   Petermann, J
   Talaga, S
   Piccoli, GCO
   Jocque, M
   Montero, G
AF Cereghino, Regis
   Pillar, Valerio D.
   Srivastava, Diane S.
   de Omena, Paula M.
   MacDonald, A. Andrew M.
   Barberis, Ignacio M.
   Corbara, Bruno
   Guzman, Laura M.
   Leroy, Celine
   Ospina Bautista, Fabiola
   Romero, Gustavo Q.
   Trzcinski, M. Kurtis
   Kratina, Pavel
   Debastiani, Vanderlei J.
   Goncalves, Ana Z.
   Marino, Nicholas A. C.
   Farjalla, Vinicius F.
   Richardson, Barbara A.
   Richardson, Michael J.
   Dezerald, Olivier
   Gilbert, Benjamin
   Petermann, Jana
   Talaga, Stanislas
   Piccoli, Gustavo C. O.
   Jocque, Merlijn
   Montero, Guillermo
TI Constraints on the functional trait space of aquatic invertebrates in
   bromeliads
SO FUNCTIONAL ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE aquatic invertebrates; ecological strategies; functional diversity;
   functional trait space; niche hypervolume
ID HABITAT; ECOLOGY; COMMUNITIES; DIVERSITY; NICHES; MACROINVERTEBRATES;
   ANIMALS; DRIVERS; TEMPLET; SYSTEMS
AB 1. Functional traits are commonly used in predictive models that link environmental drivers and community structure to ecosystem functioning. A prerequisite is to identify robust sets of continuous axes of trait variation, and to understand the ecological and evolutionary constraints that result in the functional trait space occupied by interacting species. Despite their diversity and role in ecosystem functioning, little is known of the constraints on the functional trait space of invertebrate biotas of entire biogeographic regions.
   2. We examined the ecological strategies and constraints underlying the realized trait space of aquatic invertebrates, using data on 12 functional traits of 852 taxa collected in tank bromeliads from Mexico to Argentina. Principal Component Analysis was used to reduce trait dimensionality to significant axes of trait variation, and the proportion of potential trait space that is actually occupied by all taxa was compared to null model expectations. Permutational Analyses of Variance were used to test whether trait combinations were clade-dependent.
   3. The major axes of trait variation represented life-history strategies optimizing resource use and antipredator adaptations. There was evidence for trophic, habitat, defence and life-history niche axes. Bromeliad invertebrates only occupied 16%-23% of the potential space within these dimensions, due to greater concentrations than predicted under uniform or normal distributions. Thus, despite high taxonomic diversity, invertebrates only utilized a small number of successful ecological strategies.
   4. Empty areas in trait space represented gaps between major phyla that arose from biological innovations, and trait combinations that are unviable in the bromeliad ecosystem. Only a few phylogenetically distant genera were neighbouring in trait space. Trait combinations aggregated taxa by family and then by order, suggesting that niche conservatism was a widespread mechanism in the diversification of ecological strategies.
RI Farjalla, Vinicius/G-4945-2010; Goncalves, Ana/E-6735-2016; Pillar,
   Valerio/B-9872-2008
OI Farjalla, Vinicius/0000-0003-4084-5983; Goncalves,
   Ana/0000-0002-9036-8831; Pillar, Valerio/0000-0001-6408-2891; Gilbert,
   Benjamin/0000-0002-4947-6822; CORBARA, Bruno/0000-0003-4232-8234;
   ospina, fabiola/0000-0003-2498-1459; Cereghino,
   Regis/0000-0003-3981-3159; Barberis, Ignacio Martin/0000-0002-6605-9270
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0269-8463
EI 1365-2435
PD OCT
PY 2018
VL 32
IS 10
BP 2435
EP 2447
DI 10.1111/1365-2435.13141
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000446322200015
ER

PT J
AU Rhoades, OK
   Lonhart, SI
   Stachowicz, JJ
AF Rhoades, O. Kennedy
   Lonhart, Steve I.
   Stachowicz, John J.
TI Fished species uniformly reduced escape behaviors in response to
   protection
SO BIOLOGICAL CONSERVATION
DT Article
DE Behavior; Protected areas; Human harvest; Ecosystem function; Flight
   initiation distance; Fishing
ID MEDIATED INDIRECT INTERACTIONS; PREDATOR-PREY INTERACTIONS; MARINE
   RESERVES; REEF FISHES; TROPHIC CASCADES; TEMPERATE REEF; ECOLOGICAL
   CONSEQUENCES; HABITAT SELECTION; INDUCED EVOLUTION; RISK-ASSESSMENT
AB Predation is a critical ecological process that alters the structure and functioning of ecosystems through density mediated and trait-mediated effects on lower trophic levels. Although studies have focused on harvest-driven reductions in abundances and sizes of targeted species, human harvest also alters species morphologies, life histories, and behaviors by selection, plasticity, and shifts in species interactions. Restricting harvest can recover the biomass of targeted species, but it is less clear how behavioral phenotypes recover, particularly relative to the impacts of potentially opposing pathways of human influence. We investigated the effects of protection on the behavioral traits of a marine fish assemblage, recording behavior of 1377 individual fishes of nine targeted kelp forest species across 16 California marine protected areas (MPAs) varying in age, protection level, and diver visitation. With long-term, full protection from harvest, all fish species exhibited shorter flight initiation distance (FID, or the distance at which an animal flees from an approaching threat) and longer time delays before fleeing, despite differences in trophic position, microhabitat use, and other ecological characteristics. These escape behaviors were amplified across new MPAs regardless of protection level, suggesting that recovery is slow and likely the result of differences in genetic or early-life experience among individuals in these long-lived species. Although the effects of full protection from harvest were partially offset by recovering populations of large piscivorous predators, the net effect of long-term, full protection on fish behavior was shorter FID. Additionally, all species had shorter FID at sites more frequently visited by divers, and this effect was greater in sites with long-term, full protection from fishing. To the extent that escape behavior is correlated with foraging behavior and predation rates, these results suggest that human-induced behavioral changes may affect ecosystem processes, even after abundances have recovered. If recovery of ecosystem functioning and services are the management goal, assessments should be broadened to include the recovery of functional traits (including behavior).
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0006-3207
EI 1873-2917
PD OCT
PY 2018
VL 226
BP 238
EP 246
DI 10.1016/j.biocon.2018.06.030
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000445992900025
ER

PT J
AU Grenie, M
   Mouillot, D
   Villeger, S
   Denelle, P
   Tucker, CM
   Munoz, F
   Violle, C
AF Grenie, Matthias
   Mouillot, David
   Villeger, Sebastien
   Denelle, Pierre
   Tucker, Caroline M.
   Munoz, Francois
   Violle, Cyrille
TI Functional rarity of coral reef fishes at the global scale: Hotspots and
   challenges for conservation
SO BIOLOGICAL CONSERVATION
DT Article
DE Functional distinctiveness; Evolutionary distinctiveness; Coral
   triangle; Funrar; Biodiversity facet
ID MARINE-PROTECTED AREAS; SPECIES RICHNESS; OCEAN ACIDIFICATION; ECOSYSTEM
   PROCESSES; DIVERSITY; ECOLOGY; VULNERABILITY; BIODIVERSITY; TRAIT;
   REDUNDANCY
AB Characterizing functional diversity has become central in ecological research and for biodiversity assessment. Understanding the role of species with rare traits, i.e. functionally rare species, in community assembly, ecosystem dynamics and functioning has recently gained momentum. However, functional rarity is still ignored in conservation strategies.
   Here, we quantified global functional and evolutionary rarity for 2073 species of coral reef fishes and compared the rarity values to IUCN Red List status. Most species were functionally common but geographically rare. However, we found very weak correlation between functional rarity and evolutionary rarity. Functional rarity was highest for species classified as not evaluated or threatened by the IUCN Red List. The location of functional rarity hotspots (Tropical Eastern Pacific) did not match hotspots of species richness and evolutionary distinctiveness (Indo-Australian Archipelago), nor the currently protected areas. We argue that functional rarity should be acknowledged for both species and site prioritization in conservation strategies.
RI Villeger, Sebastien/C-6272-2011
OI Villeger, Sebastien/0000-0002-2362-7178
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0006-3207
EI 1873-2917
PD OCT
PY 2018
VL 226
BP 288
EP 299
DI 10.1016/j.biocon.2018.08.011
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000445992900031
ER

PT J
AU Barner, AK
   Chan, F
   Hettinger, A
   Hacker, SD
   Marshall, K
   Menge, BA
AF Barner, Allison K.
   Chan, Francis
   Hettinger, Annaliese
   Hacker, Sally D.
   Marshall, Kelsey
   Menge, Bruce A.
TI Generality in multispecies responses to ocean acidification revealed
   through multiple hypothesis testing
SO GLOBAL CHANGE BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE allometry; calcification; coralline algae; eco-physiology; functional
   groups; functional traits; global change; rocky intertidal
ID CRUSTOSE CORALLINE ALGAE; CLIMATE-CHANGE; MARINE ORGANISMS; BODY-SIZE;
   COMMUNITY RESPONSES; COASTAL CALCIFIERS; INORGANIC CARBON; REEF
   COMMUNITIES; MODEL SELECTION; ELEVATED PCO(2)
AB Decades of research have demonstrated that many calcifying species are negatively affected by ocean acidification, a major anthropogenic threat in marine ecosystems. However, even closely related species may exhibit different responses to ocean acidification and less is known about the drivers that shape such variation in different species. Here, we examine the drivers of physiological performance under ocean acidification in a group of five species of turf-forming coralline algae. Specifically, quantitating the relative weight of evidence for each of ten hypotheses, we show that variation in coralline calcification and photosynthesis was best explained by allometric traits. Across ocean acidification conditions, larger individuals (measured as noncalcified mass) had higher net calcification and photosynthesis rates. Importantly, our approach was able to not only identify the aspect of size that drove the performance of coralline algae, but also determined that responses to ocean acidification were not dependent on species identity, evolutionary relatedness, habitat, shape, or structural composition. In fact, we found that failure to test multiple, alternative hypotheses would underestimate the generality of physiological performances, leading to the conclusion that each species had different baseline performance under ocean acidification. Testing among alternative hypotheses is an essential step toward determining the generalizability of experiments across taxa and identifying common drivers of species responses to global change.
OI Barner, Allison/0000-0001-9909-5713
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1354-1013
EI 1365-2486
PD OCT
PY 2018
VL 24
IS 10
BP 4464
EP 4477
DI 10.1111/gcb.14372
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000445728800002
PM 30047188
ER

PT J
AU Thomas, Y
   Bacher, C
AF Thomas, Yoann
   Bacher, Cedric
TI Assessing the sensitivity of bivalve populations to global warming using
   an individual-based modelling approach
SO GLOBAL CHANGE BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE benthic species; biogeography; climate scenario; dynamic energy budget;
   global warming; phenology; population dynamics; temperature tolerance
ID OYSTER CRASSOSTREA-GIGAS; MUSSEL MYTILUS-EDULIS; ENERGY BUDGET THEORY;
   CLIMATE-CHANGE; PACIFIC OYSTER; ENGLISH-CHANNEL; DYNAMICS MODEL;
   REPRODUCTIVE-CYCLES; THERMAL PHYSIOLOGY; ECOLOGICAL NICHE
AB Climate change exposes benthic species populations in coastal ecosystems to a combination of different stressors (e.g., warming, acidification and eutrophication), threatening the sustainability of the ecological functions they provide. Thermal stress appears to be one of the strongest drivers impacting marine ecosystems, acting across a wide range of scales, from individual metabolic performances to geographic distribution of populations. Accounting for and integrating the response of species functional traits to thermal stress is therefore a necessary step in predicting how populations will respond to the warming expected in coming decades. Here, we developed an individual-based population model using a mechanistic formulation of metabolic processes within the framework of the dynamic energy budget theory. Through a large number of simulations, we assessed the sensitivity of population growth potential to thermal stress and food conditions based on a climate projection scenario (Representative Concentration Pathway; RCP8.5: no reduction of greenhouse gas emissions). We focused on three bivalve species with contrasting thermal tolerance ranges and distinct distribution ranges along 5,000km of coastline in the NE Atlantic: the Pacific oyster (Magallana gigas), and two mussel species: Mytilus edulis and Mytilus galloprovincialis. Our results suggest substantial and contrasting changes within species depending on local temperature and food concentration. Reproductive phenology appeared to be a core process driving the responses of the populations, and these patterns were closely related to species thermal tolerances. The nonlinear relationship we found between individual life-history traits and response at the population level emphasizes the need to consider the interactions resulting from upscaling across different levels of biological organisation. These results underline the importance of a process-based understanding of benthic population response to seawater warming, which will be necessary for forward planning of resource management and strategies for conservation and adaptation to environmental changes.
RI Thomas, Yoann/G-6648-2016
OI Thomas, Yoann/0000-0001-7980-5239; Bacher, Cedric/0000-0001-6090-4667
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1354-1013
EI 1365-2486
PD OCT
PY 2018
VL 24
IS 10
BP 4581
EP 4597
DI 10.1111/gcb.14402
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000445728800011
PM 30030873
ER

PT J
AU Shuai, FM
   Lek, S
   Li, XH
   Zhao, T
AF Shuai, Fangmin
   Lek, Sovan
   Li, Xinhui
   Zhao, Tian
TI Biological invasions undermine the functional diversity of fish
   community in a large subtropical river
SO BIOLOGICAL INVASIONS
DT Article
DE Biological invasions; Functional diversity; Functional differences; Fish
   community; Pearl River
ID FRESH-WATER; SPECIES INVASIONS; TAXONOMIC HOMOGENIZATION; PLANT
   INVASIONS; BIODIVERSITY; CONSEQUENCES; ASSEMBLAGES; EXTINCTIONS;
   FRAMEWORK; REVEALS
AB Biological invasions are considered to be one of the main threats to biodiversity. Invasions lead to a loss of native species, changes to species composition, and a shift in the functioning and stability of ecosystems. In this study, derived from nine consecutive years of monitoring data and based on morphological functional trait values measured at the individual-level, we quantified the functional differences between native and non-native fish species and further assessed how biological invasions impact on species richness and functional diversity in the large subtropical Pearl River in southern China. Specifically, we differentiated intraspecific functional variability by separating individuals of a species according to their different life stages. Our results provided strong evidence that native and non-native fish were significantly different in their functional attributes. Invasion caused no obvious change in species richness; however, the yearly increase in non-native populations was accompanied by a significant decrease in functional niches of native species and change in several aspects of functional diversity in the fish community. Decreasing functional richness, and increasing functional divergence and specialization, indicated that most native species had been replaced by non-native species with different specific functional traits, which may affect ecosystem stability. Notably, this study provided empirical evidence that functional diversity was more sensitive to biological invasions than species richness. Our results show that control of non-native aquatic species is both necessary and urgent in the Pearl River. An understanding of the processes described in this study can form the basis of conservation in fish community, which is critical to sustainable and successful fisheries.
OI ZHAO, Tian/0000-0003-2000-9187
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1387-3547
EI 1573-1464
PD OCT
PY 2018
VL 20
IS 10
BP 2981
EP 2996
DI 10.1007/s10530-018-1751-y
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000445069800024
ER

PT J
AU Baumgartner, MT
   de Oliveira, AG
   Agostinho, AA
   Gomes, LC
AF Baumgartner, Matheus T.
   de Oliveira, Anielly G.
   Agostinho, Angelo A.
   Gomes, Luiz C.
TI Fish functional diversity responses following flood pulses in the upper
   Parana River floodplain
SO ECOLOGY OF FRESHWATER FISH
DT Article
DE cross-correlation function; disturbance; fish assemblage; flood legacy;
   functional ecology; time lag
ID FRESH-WATER FISHES; MIGRATORY FISHES; PISCIVOROUS FISH; MULTIPLE TRAITS;
   BODY CONDITION; REGIME; ASSEMBLAGES; ECOLOGY; BRAZIL; TIME
AB Flood pulses are the main force driving the dynamics of aquatic communities in floodplains. The responses of communities to environmental changes following flood pulses usually demand a time lag to appear and reach the climax. We assembled a data set of 16years of fish samplings to assess the relationship between water level and four functional diversity measures, in the upper Parana River floodplain. Specifically, we approached four aspects of each relationship between water level and functional diversity: nature (positive or negative), sensitivity (response intensity), responsiveness (response delay) and extent (response duration). The nature of the relationship between water level and functional diversity was positive in all cases. Functional richness (FRic) responded right after flood pulses, although with shorter extent. Abundance-dependent functional measures (evennessFEve; divergenceFDiv; and Rao's quadratic entropyRao's Q) presented delayed responses, reaching peaks more than 1.5years after flood pulses. Significant effects of floods on fish functional diversity were observed for more than 3years, although the highest functional diversity was observed with 1.8years, on average. More importantly, flood pulses had no longer significant effects on functional diversity after 4years. Regarding conservation strategies in regulated systems, flood events should occur every 2 or 3years, with adequate timing (October-November), intensity (up to 450cm) and duration (at least 50 uninterrupted days). Intervals longer than 3years or inadequate timing, intensity and duration could dramatically decrease functional diversity and compromise ecosystem services.
OI Agostinho, Angelo Antonio/0000-0002-4707-9444
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0906-6691
EI 1600-0633
PD OCT
PY 2018
VL 27
IS 4
BP 910
EP 919
DI 10.1111/eff.12402
SC Fisheries; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000445181800003
ER

PT J
AU Palacios, MM
   Malerba, ME
   McCormick, MI
AF Palacios, M. M.
   Malerba, M. E.
   McCormick, M. I.
TI Multiple predator effects on juvenile prey survival
SO OECOLOGIA
DT Article
DE Predator identity; Predator hunting mode; Predator density;
   Additive-substitutive design; Mesopredators; Coral reef fish
ID CORAL-REEF FISH; HABITAT COMPLEXITY; INTERSPECIFIC INTERACTIONS;
   HERBIVORE SUPPRESSION; INTRAGUILD PREDATION; FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY;
   TEMPORAL VARIATION; FEEDING-BEHAVIOR; TROPHIC CASCADES; FOOD-WEB
AB Predicting multiple predator effects (MPEs) on shared prey remains one of the biggest challenges in ecology. Empirical evidence indicates that interactions among predators can alter predation rates and modify any expected linear effects on prey survival. Knowledge on predator density, identity and life-history traits is expected to help predict the behavioral mechanisms that lead to non-linear changes in predation. Yet, few studies have rigorously examined the effects of predator-predator interactions on prey survival, particularly with marine vertebrate predators. Using an additive-substitutive design, we experimentally paired reef piscivores with different hunting mode [active predator, Pseudochromis fuscus (F); ambush predators, Cephalopholis boenak (B), Epinephelus maculatus (M)] to determine how behavioral interactions modified their combined impacts on damselfish prey. Results showed that behavioral patterns among predators matched those predicted from their hunting mode. However, it was the identity of the predators what determined the strength of any positive or negative interactions, and thus the nature and magnitude of MPEs on prey survival (i.e., risk-enhancing effects: treatments BB, MM and FM; risk-reducing: BM; and linear effects: FF, FB). Given the specificity of predator-predator interactions, none of the predators were fully functionally redundant. Even when two species seemed substitutable (i.e., predators F and M), they led to vastly diverse effects when paired with additional predator species (i.e., B). We concluded that knowledge of the identity of the predator species and the behavioral interactions among them is crucial to successfully predict MPEs in natural systems.
OI Malerba, Martino E./0000-0002-7480-4779
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0029-8549
EI 1432-1939
PD OCT
PY 2018
VL 188
IS 2
BP 417
EP 427
DI 10.1007/s00442-018-4182-7
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000445426400008
PM 29948313
ER

PT J
AU Calapez, AR
   Serra, SRQ
   Santos, JM
   Branco, P
   Ferreira, T
   Hein, T
   Brito, AG
   Feio, MJ
AF Calapez, A. R.
   Serra, S. R. Q.
   Santos, J. M.
   Branco, P.
   Ferreira, T.
   Hein, T.
   Brito, A. G.
   Feio, M. J.
TI The effect of hypoxia and flow decrease in macroinvertebrate functional
   responses: A trait-based approach to multiple-stressors in mesocosms
SO SCIENCE OF THE TOTAL ENVIRONMENT
DT Article
DE Streams; Mediterranean; Hypoxia; Flow velocity; Trait diversity;
   Ecosystem functions
ID BIOLOGICAL TRAITS; DISSOLVED-OXYGEN; SPECIES TRAITS; STREAM
   MACROINVERTEBRATES; INVERTEBRATE TRAITS; NEW-ZEALAND;
   BENTHIC-MACROINVERTEBRATES; COMMUNITY ECOLOGY; WATER ABSTRACTION;
   AQUATIC INSECTS
AB River ecosystems are most often subject to multiple co-occurring anthropogenic stressors. Mediterranean streams are particularly affected by water scarcity and organic loads that commonly lead to a simultaneous reduction in flow and increasing depletion of dissolved oxygen.
   In the present study, the single and combined effects of water scarcity (flow velocity reduction) and dissolved oxygen depletion were used to evaluate alterations of drifting macroinvertebrates on a channel mesocosm system, by employing a multiple trait-based approach.
   Our main findings confirmed that the impact of the two combined stressors can be implicated in alterations of ecosystem functions as result of the changes in proportions of biological traits. Overall, our results showed that, individually, flow velocity reduction and a severe oxygen depletion promoted a shift in community traits. In more detail, biological traits describing the dispersal of organisms and their respiration showed the strongest responses. The respiration mode responded to low flow with drift increase of gill breathers and decrease of individuals with tegument, whereas dispersal was clearly affected by the combination of stressors. Resistance through eggs was higher with the single effect of flow reduction, while swimmers 'relative abundance increased in individuals that drift after exposure to the combination of stressors. Thus, while flow reduction alone is expected to specifically filter out the gill breathers and the egg producers, the combination of stressors will impact more drastically organism's dispersal and swimmers. Such changes in biological traits can result in variations in ecosystem functioning through, for example, local changes in biomass, secondary production, stream metabolism as well as resulting in biodiversity losses or alterations of its distribution patterns. (C) 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
RI Santos, Jose Maria/F-9022-2010
OI Santos, Jose Maria/0000-0003-1232-2560; Serra, Sonia/0000-0003-4426-465X
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0048-9697
EI 1879-1026
PD OCT 1
PY 2018
VL 637
BP 647
EP 656
DI 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.05.071
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000436605400062
PM 29758421
ER

PT J
AU Liu, XQ
   Wang, HZ
AF Liu, Xueqin
   Wang, Hongzhu
TI Contrasting patterns and drivers in taxonomic versus functional
   diversity, and community assembly of aquatic plants in subtropical lakes
SO BIODIVERSITY AND CONSERVATION
DT Article
DE Keywords Freshwater; Functional diversity; Limiting similarity; Regional
   scale; Species richness
ID WATER-LEVEL FLUCTUATIONS; LACUSTRINE FISH COMMUNITIES; SPECIES-RICHNESS;
   MACROPHYTE RICHNESS; PHYLOGENETIC ALPHA; RELATIVE ROLE; BIODIVERSITY;
   TRAITS; MODEL; AREA
AB Little is known about the differences in patterns and drivers between species richness (SR) and functional diversity (FD) in aquatic plants at large scales, and the underlying assembly mechanisms are not well studied. We compared SR and FD patterns of aquatic plant assemblages in 29 subtropical lakes, and detected the underlying assembly rules. Environmental drivers of SR and FD were revealed by GLM and GAM models, and the relative importance of assembly rules was determined by a null model approach. SR and FD of aquatic plants presented different patterns and drivers in this region. SR was significantly correlated with geographic, hydrological and water quality variables. We found a lower functional richness but higher functional evenness and divergence in the highland lakes. There was no significant correlation between functional richness and environmental variables. Null model analyses showed that most values of standardized effect size were located between the confidence interval, indicating a dominance of randomness. Deterministic processes such as limiting similarity and habitat filtering were also important in individual lakes. Habitat filtering plays a stronger role shaping the hydrophyte assemblages especially with the increase of elevation, area and AWLF (amplitude of water level fluctuation). Our results demonstrated that FD, in contrast to SR, were more resistant to environmental variations, and hydrology played an important role in shaping both SR and FD patterns in lake ecosystems. Furthermore, we revealed complex assembly rules and emphasized the importance of both stochastic and deterministic mechanisms in structuring aquatic plant assemblages at the regional scale.
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0960-3115
EI 1572-9710
PD OCT
PY 2018
VL 27
IS 12
BP 3103
EP 3118
DI 10.1007/s10531-018-1590-2
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000442731500004
ER

PT J
AU Angove, C
   Norkko, A
   Gustafsson, C
AF Angove, Charlotte
   Norkko, Alf
   Gustafsson, Camilla
TI Assessing the efficiencies and challenges for nutrient uptake by aquatic
   plants
SO JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL MARINE BIOLOGY AND ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE Nitrogen; Functional traits; Seagrass; Baltic Sea; Sediment; Zostera
   marina; Nutrient cycling; Nutrient enrichment
ID SUSPENSION-FEEDING BIVALVES; SEDIMENT-WATER INTERFACE;
   THALASSIA-TESTUDINUM; CARBONATE ENVIRONMENT; SEAGRASS PRODUCTIVITY;
   ZOSTERA-MARINA; NITROGEN; PHOSPHORUS; GROWTH; SCALE
AB Aquatic plant meadows are valuable components to the 'coastal filter' and it is important to understand the processes that drive their ability to cycle nutrients. However, at present, the field-based evidence for understanding the drivers of nutrient uptake by plants is lacking. This study aimed to investigate how well individual shoots of aquatic plants could meet their nitrogen demands using the sediment nutrient pool (porewater ammonium) and to explore which traits helped to facilitate such uptake. Several species were investigated in shallow, submerged (2-4 m) mixed-species communities in the northern Baltic Sea using incubation experiments with enriched ammonium. After a 3.5 h incubation time, individuals were collected and analysed for nitrogen (% DW) and N-15 (at-%) concentrations. Uptake by plants was calculated per unit nitrogen in response to the N-15 labelled source and to overall nitrogen availability. Background porewater ammonium availability was highly variable between individual plants. Species identity did not significantly affect uptake metrics and the effect of ambient porewater availability was weak. As biomass increased there were significant logarithmic declines in the 95th quantiles of nutrient uptake rates, ambient porewater nutrient availability and aboveground nitrogen tissue concentrations (% DW). Such findings suggested that uptake rates of plants were significantly demand driven and the nutrient conditions of the porewater were significantly driven by the demands of the plant. Findings parameterised the unfulfilled potential for some aquatic plants to cycle nutrients more efficiently and highlighted the potential importance of access to new nutrient sources as a way of enhancing nutrient cycling by aquatic plants. Plant traits and community properties such as the activity of infauna could facilitate such an access and are likely important for nutrient uptake.
RI Norkko, Alf/A-1856-2012
OI Norkko, Alf/0000-0002-9741-4458; Angove, Charlotte/0000-0003-2622-2667;
   Gustafsson, Camilla/0000-0001-7308-3802
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0022-0981
EI 1879-1697
PD OCT
PY 2018
VL 507
BP 23
EP 30
DI 10.1016/j.jembe.2018.07.005
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000442704000004
ER

PT J
AU Giacoletti, A
   Cappello, S
   Mancini, G
   Mangano, MC
   Sara, G
AF Giacoletti, A.
   Cappello, S.
   Mancini, G.
   Mangano, M. C.
   Sara, G.
TI Predicting the effectiveness of oil recovery strategies in the marine
   polluted environment Check
SO JOURNAL OF ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT
DT Article
DE DEB model; Mytilus galloprovincialis; Oil pollution; Remediation;
   Mediterranean sea; Good environmental status
ID MUSSEL MYTILUS-EDULIS; ENERGY BUDGET MODEL; MEDITERRANEAN SEA;
   BRACHIDONTES-PHARAONIS; ADRIATIC SEA; SPILL BIOREMEDIATION; INTERTIDAL
   MUSSELS; FUNCTIONAL TRAITS; GAS PLATFORMS; GROWTH
AB Many recent studies have focused their attention on the physiological stress experienced by marine organisms in measuring ecotoxicological responses. Here we suggest a new approach for investigating the effects of an anthropogenic pollutant on Life-History (LH) traits of marine organisms, to provide stakeholders and policy makers an effective tool to evaluate the best environmental recovery strategies and plans. A Dynamic Energy Budget (DEB), coupled with a biophysical model was used to predict the effects of a six-month oil spill on Mytilus galloprovincialis' LH traits and to test two potential recovery strategies in the central Mediterranean Sea. Oxygen consumption rates were used to check for increasing energetic maintenance costs [p(M)] respectively in oil-polluted system treatments ( similar to 76.2%) and polluted systems with physical (nano-bubbles similar to 32.6%) or chemical treatment (dispersant similar to 18.4%). Our model outputs highlighted a higher growth reduction of intertidal compared to subtidal populations and contextually an effect on the reproductive output and on the maturation time of this latter. The models also enabled an estimation of the timing of the disturbance affecting both the intertidal and subtidal populations' growth and reproduction. Interestingly, results led to the identification of the chemical dispersant as being the best remediation technique in contexts of oil spill contamination.
OI Giacoletti, Antonio/0000-0002-6350-720X; SARA',
   Gianluca/0000-0002-7658-5274; Mangano, Maria
   Cristina/0000-0001-6980-9834
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0301-4797
EI 1095-8630
PD OCT 1
PY 2018
VL 223
BP 749
EP 757
DI 10.1016/j.jenvman.2018.06.094
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000442057500075
PM 29986322
ER

PT J
AU Gorzelak, P
AF Gorzelak, Przemyslaw
TI Microstructural evidence for stalk autotomy in Holocrinus - The oldest
   stem-group isocrinid
SO PALAEOGEOGRAPHY PALAEOCLIMATOLOGY PALAEOECOLOGY
DT Article
DE Crinoids; Stereom; Functional morphology; Triassic; Stalk shedding;
   Predation
ID MESOZOIC MARINE REVOLUTION; CRINOID STALK; ECHINODERMATA; TAPHONOMY;
   POLAND; MORPHOLOGY; PHYLOGENY; SVALBARD; ORIGIN; GUIDE
AB Holocrinid crinoids (Holocrinus) are among the oldest, if not the oldest, post-Paleozoic crinoids, which are widely considered the stem-group isocrinids for the post-Paleozoic monophyletic subclass Articulata. Owing to their phylogenetic and stratigraphic position, the morphology and paleobiology of these crinoids have received considerable attention. Although the holocrinid stalk is similar to that of fossil and living isocrinids, it lacks flat and rigid synostosial articulations, which are sites specialized for autotomy. Holocrinids were thus long considered sessile, without the ability to re-attach. However, taphonomic data, such as specific pattern of preferred disarticulation at the distal facet of nodals, indicated that Holocrinus was likely capable of stalk autotomy and relocation. This trait, that is considered an anti-predatory adaptation against benthic predation, has recently served as example of fundamental change in benthic marine communities, such as the Mesozoic marine revolution (MMR). Here I describe stereom microstructure of the stalk of Early-Middle Triassic Holocrinus. The holocrinid stalk is mainly constructed of straight stereom passageways passing through the columnals, that are diagnostic of long through-going ligaments. At the distal symplexial nodal facet, however, fine and dense stereom, in which pores are irregular in outline and show no alignment, is observed. The latter stereom type strongly resembles synostosial stereom in living isocrinids, that is associated with short ligaments, specifically designed for autotomy. These findings thus strongly support stalk shedding abilities in holocrinids. These results emphasize that microstructural observations, coupled with taphonomic data, may provide more insights into functional inferences than macromorphological data alone.
RI Gorzelak, Przemyslaw/B-6329-2015
OI Gorzelak, Przemyslaw/0000-0001-5706-1881
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0031-0182
EI 1872-616X
PD OCT 1
PY 2018
VL 506
BP 202
EP 207
DI 10.1016/j.palaeo.2018.06.036
SC Physical Geography; Geology; Paleontology
UT WOS:000440960100016
ER

PT J
AU Falasco, E
   Piano, E
   Doretto, A
   Fenoglio, S
   Bona, F
AF Falasco, E.
   Piano, E.
   Doretto, A.
   Fenoglio, S.
   Bona, F.
TI Lentification in Alpine rivers: patterns of diatom assemblages and
   functional traits
SO AQUATIC SCIENCES
DT Article
DE Bacillariophyceae; Hydrological alterations; Ecological guilds; Growth
   forms; Eco-morphological groups
ID MACROINVERTEBRATE ASSEMBLAGES; BENTHIC COMMUNITIES; DROUGHT;
   BIODIVERSITY; STREAMS; CONSERVATION; INDICATORS; DIVERSITY
AB Hydrological alterations in Alpine rivers have been largely increasing due to the combined effects of global climate change and local impacts. Water flow intermittency starts with a process called lentification, which leads to the transformation of the aquatic ecosystem with severe consequences on biotic communities. These consequences have a greater impact in Alpine headwater streams, which are considered important and fragile hotspots of biodiversity and a source of threatened species; the new regime creates conditions to which native biota are poorly adapted. The main aim of our work was to evaluate taxonomical, functional and structural changes of diatom communities in Alpine rivers during the lentification process that precedes a supra-seasonal drought. Contrary to what was expected, communities exposed to river shrinking showed a level of homogeneity comparable to those collected in permanent sections. We therefore hypothesized that lentification created an intermediate disturbance that favoured heterogeneity of assemblages. Conversely, ecological guilds, growth forms and eco-morphological groups varied along temporal and spatial gradients driven by the lentification process. Small, motile and medium-sized low profile species were more abundant during summer, as well as adnate and stalked ones. Lentification limited the presence of high profile guilds and mucous-forming colonies. Droughts in Alpine streams are fairly recent processes, and the dynamics of aquatic communities facing water scarcity are largely unknown. The results we obtained provide important insights towards a more refined functional classification of diatoms for evaluating hydrological alterations.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1015-1621
EI 1420-9055
PD OCT
PY 2018
VL 80
IS 4
AR UNSP 36
DI 10.1007/s00027-018-0587-y
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000441043500001
ER

PT J
AU Mendonca, MDS
   Stiling, P
AF Mendonca Jr, M. D. S.
   Stiling, P.
TI Subtropical Interactions: Comparing Galling Insect and Host Plant
   Diversity in Southern Brazil and Florida
SO NEOTROPICAL ENTOMOLOGY
DT Article
DE Insect gall; local diversity; beta diversity; latitudinal gradient;
   coastal woodland
ID GRANDE-DO-SUL; SPECIES RICHNESS; ARTHROPOD DIVERSITY; PATTERNS; FOREST;
   BIODIVERSITY; PERSPECTIVE
AB Gall-inducing insects seem to have a diversity pattern distinct from the usual latitudinal decrease in species, with more species occurring in xeric environments instead. Many questions regarding galler diversity over geographical scales remain unanswered: for example, little is known about beta diversity, and the role super host plants play in local/regional richness. Our aim was to compare galling insect and host plant diversity in different biogeographical regions, but under similar environmental conditions. We sampled short stature coastal woodlands on sandy soils of the Atlantic coast in both USA (Florida) and Brazil (Rio Grande do Sul, RS), between 25A degrees and 30A degrees latitude. Little-used 200-m long trails were searched during 90 min for galls; there were four trails in USA and five in Brazil. Gall functional traits (galled plant organ, gall shape and colour) proportions were not different between Florida and RS. Local galling and host plant species richness also did not differ, and neither did regional galling diversity. The beta diversity pattern, however, was distinct: sites in Florida have more similar galling faunas than sites in RS. Common diversity patterns indicate common environmental biotic (plant diversity, vegetation structure) and abiotic (climate, soil) factors might be contributing to these similar responses. As Brazilian sites are in the Atlantic forest hotspot, a high galling insect beta diversity might be caused by a higher heterogeneity at larger scales-sample-based rarefaction curves were ascending for Brazil, but not for USA. Myrtaceans were super hosts in Brazil, but not in Florida, where oaks take up this role.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1519-566X
EI 1678-8052
PD OCT
PY 2018
VL 47
IS 5
BP 628
EP 633
DI 10.1007/s13744-017-0563-6
SC Entomology
UT WOS:000440839900006
PM 29168122
ER

PT J
AU Molina, WF
   Benetti, DD
   Fiorentino, JN
   de Lima, PA
   Alencar, CERD
   da Costa, GWWF
   da Motta-Neto, CC
   de Nobrega, MF
AF Molina, Wagner Franco
   Benetti, Daniel Domingues
   Fiorentino, Julian Nicholas
   de Lima-Filho, Paulo Augusto
   Rocha Duarte Alencar, Carlos Eduardo
   Werneck Felix da Costa, Gidedo Wagner
   da Motta-Neto, Clovis Coutinho
   de Nobrega, Marcelo Francisco
TI Early sex shape dimorphism (SShD) in Rachycentron canadum (Linnaeus,
   1766) and its applications for monosex culture
SO AQUACULTURE
DT Article
DE Cobia; Gender selection; Sexual dimorphism; Marine fish farming
ID GULF-OF-MEXICO; SIZE DIMORPHISM; JUVENILE COBIA; GEOMETRIC
   MORPHOMETRICS; REPRODUCTIVE-BIOLOGY; EXTERNAL MORPHOLOGY; NORTHERN GULF;
   GENETIC-BASIS; FISH; GROWTH
AB Rachycentron canadum (cobia) is a species that has attracted the interest of the marine fish farming industry due to displaying numerous traits favorable to cultivation. The species is characterized by its large size, rapid growth, robustness and established technological support for cultivation. Cobia shows sexual size dimorphism (SSD) as adults, with females being significantly larger than males. In fish, sexual dimorphism related to morphology can be the result of ecological, functional, or adaptive selection. Methodologies that allow the application of monosex cultures increase both the biotechnological and production potential of a species. With a view to establishing parameters for early sex determination in R. canadum, morphological analyses were conducted in juveniles aged 139 days (4.6 months) using geometric morphometrics. Sexual shape dimorphism (SShD) in female cobia is expressed by an elongated body and extended space between pectoral and anal fins, suggesting fecundity-related morphological adaptations. The results are promising and indicate a high index of early sex discrimination using geometric morphometrics, demonstrating the possibility of developing routine protocols that can be applied to increase species production.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0044-8486
EI 1873-5622
PD OCT 1
PY 2018
VL 495
BP 320
EP 327
DI 10.1016/j.aquaculture.2018.05.056
SC Fisheries; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000439123500037
ER

PT J
AU Dirksen, JS
   De Melo, JCF
AF Dirksen, Jessica Stefani
   Ferreira De Melo Junior, Joao Carlos
TI MORPHO-ANATOMICAL PLASTICITY OF STYLOSANTHES VISCOSA (FABACEAE) IN
   RESPONSE TO DIFFERENT SOIL AND LIGHT CONDITIONS OF RESTINGA ENVIRONMENTS
SO PAKISTAN JOURNAL OF BOTANY
DT Article
DE Biodiversity conservation; Structural adjustments; Functional
   morpho-anatomy; Coastal plain
ID SANTA-CATARINA; LEAF TRAITS; RAIN-FOREST; BRAZIL; COMMUNITIES;
   HERBIVORY; DEFENSE; DUNE; FORM
AB Structural plasticity is an important ability of plants to acclimate to different environmental conditions, especially in limiting environments such as restingas. The objective of this study was to evaluate the morpho-anatomical plasticity of Stylosanthes viscosa (L.) Sw. (Fabaceae) populations based on the hypothesis that edaphic and luminous factors cause different structural adjustments, such that, in the restinga, herbaceous plants would be more xeromorphic than shrub-tree plants. The study area included formations of herbaceous and shrub-arboreal restinga of Acarai State Park, located in Sao Francisco do Sul, Santa Catarina, Brazil. Morpho-anatomical attributes of 10 individuals per formation were compared with the t-test. Principal components analysis was used to evaluate the influence of environmental factors on S. viscosa (L.) Sw. populations. In both formations, organic matter content had the greatest influence on adjustments exhibited by the species, with greater emphasis on plant height, stem diameter, fresh mass, dry mass, leaf area and specific leaf area. Morphological attributes exhibited greater plasticity than anatomical attributes. The population of the herbaceous restinga was observed to be more xeromorphic, exhibiting greater investment in mechanical tissues, as opposed to the shrub-arboreal restinga population, which exhibited greater investment in photosynthetic tissues. The results demonstrate the strong influence that soil and light have on the morpho-anatomical plasticity of S. viscosa (L.) Sw. in restinga environments.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0556-3321
EI 2070-3368
PD OCT
PY 2018
VL 50
IS 5
BP 1877
EP 1884
SC Plant Sciences
UT WOS:000433391500026
ER

PT J
AU Smeti, E
   Roelke, DL
   Tsirtsis, G
   Spatharis, S
AF Smeti, Evangelia
   Roelke, Daniel L.
   Tsirtsis, George
   Spatharis, Sofie
TI Species extinctions strengthen the relationship between biodiversity and
   resource use efficiency
SO ECOLOGICAL MODELLING
DT Article
DE Biodiversity ecosystem function relationship; BEF; Resource
   fluctuations; Species extinctions; Functional traits
ID NUTRIENT LIMITATION; ECOSYSTEM PRODUCTIVITY; PHYTOPLANKTON BIOMASS;
   MULTISPECIES COMPETITION; COMMUNITY COMPOSITION; CONTINUOUS-CULTURE;
   P-LIMITATION; ALGAL GROWTH; HONG-KONG; DIVERSITY
AB Evidence from terrestrial ecosystems indicates that biodiversity relates to ecosystem functions (BEF), but this relationship varies in its strength, in part, as a function of habitat connectivity and fragmentation. In primary producers, common proxies of ecosystem function include productivity and resource use efficiency. In aquatic primary producers, macroecological studies have observed BEF variance, where ecosystems with lower richness show stronger BEF relationships. However, aquatic ecosystems are less affected by habitat fragmentation than terrestrial systems and the mechanism underlying this BEF variance has been largely overlooked. Here, we provide a mechanistic explanation of BEF variance using a trait-based, numerical model parameterized for phytoplankton. Resource supply in our model fluctuates recurrently, similar to many coastal systems. Our findings show that following an extinction event, the BEF relationship can be driven by the species that are the most efficient resource users. Specifically, in species-rich assemblages, increased redundancy of efficient resource users minimizes the risk of losing function following an extinction event. On the other hand, in species-poor assemblages, low redundancy of efficient resource users increases the risk of losing ecosystem function following extinctions. Furthermore, we corroborate our findings with what has been observed from large-scale field studies on phytoplankton.
OI Roelke, Daniel/0000-0002-3166-3793
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0304-3800
EI 1872-7026
PD SEP 24
PY 2018
VL 384
BP 75
EP 86
DI 10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2018.06.006
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000447581600009
ER

PT J
AU Serodio, J
   Schmidt, W
   Frommlet, JC
   Christa, G
   Nitschke, MR
AF Serodio, Joao
   Schmidt, William
   Frommlet, Jorg C.
   Christa, Gregor
   Nitschke, Matthew R.
TI An LED-based multi-actinic illumination system for the high throughput
   study of photosynthetic light responses
SO PEERJ
DT Article
DE Chlorophyll fluorescence; Imaging; Photosynthesis; Photoinhibition;
   Macroalgae; LEDs; 3D printing
ID PHOTOSYSTEM-II PHOTOINACTIVATION; CHLOROPHYLL FLUORESCENCE; CHLOROPLAST
   MOVEMENT; ARABIDOPSIS-THALIANA; ACTION SPECTRUM; LOW-COST;
   PHOTOINHIBITION; PHOTOPROTECTION; IRRADIANCE; LEAVES
AB The responses of photosynthetic organisms to light stress are of interest for both fundamental and applied research. Functional traits related to the photoinhibition, the light-induced loss of photosynthetic efficiency, are particularly interesting as this process is a key limiting factor of photosynthetic productivity in algae and plants. The quantitative characterization of light responses is often time-consuming and calls for cost-effective high throughput approaches that enable the fast screening of multiple samples. Here we present a novel illumination system based on the concept of 'multiactinic imaging' of in vivo chlorophyll fluorescence. The system is based on the combination of an array of individually addressable low power RGBW LEDs and customdesigned well plates, allowing for the independent illumination of 64 samples through the digital manipulation of both exposure duration and light intensity. The illumination system is inexpensive and easily fabricated, based on open source electronics, off-theshelf components, and 3D-printed parts, and is optimized for imaging of chlorophyll fluorescence. The high-throughput potential of the system is illustrated by assessing the functional diversity in light responses of marine macroalgal species, through the fast and simultaneous determination of kinetic parameters characterizing the response to light stress of multiple samples. Although the presented illumination system was primarily designed for the measurement of phenotypic traits related to photosynthetic activity and photoinhibition, it can be potentially used for a number of alternative applications, including the measurement of chloroplast phototaxis and action spectra, or as the basis for microphotobioreactors.
RI CESAM, UA/M-3762-2015
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 2167-8359
PD SEP 4
PY 2018
VL 6
AR e5589
DI 10.7717/peerj.5589
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000444045500006
PM 30202661
ER

PT J
AU Beckett, SJ
   Weitz, JS
AF Beckett, Stephen J.
   Weitz, Joshua S.
TI The Effect of Strain Level Diversity on Robust Inference of
   Virus-Induced Mortality of Phytoplankton
SO FRONTIERS IN MICROBIOLOGY
DT Article
DE diversity; dilution method; trait-based models; viruses; viral lysis
ID MICROBIAL FOOD WEBS; MARINE VIRUSES; MEDIATED MORTALITY; ECOSYSTEM;
   BACTERIA; GROWTH; OCEAN; SENSITIVITY; RESPONSES; NETWORKS
AB Infection and lysis of phytoplankton by viruses affects population dynamics and nutrient cycles within oceanic microbial communities. However, estimating the quantitative rates of viral-induced lysis remains challenging in situ. The modified dilution method is the most commonly utilized empirical approach to estimate virus-induced killing rates of phytoplankton. The lysis rate estimates of the modified dilution method are based on models which assume virus-host interactions can be represented by a single virus and a single host population with homogeneous life-history traits. Here, using modeling approaches, we examine the robustness of the modified dilution method in multi-strain, complex communities. We assume that strains differ in their life history traits, including growth rates (of hosts) and lysis rates (by viruses). We show that trait differences affect resulting experimental dynamics such that lysis rates measured using the modified dilution method may be driven by the fastest replicating strains; which are not necessarily the most abundant in situ. We discuss the implications of using the modified dilution method and alternative dilution-based approaches for estimating viral-induced lysis rates in marine microbial communities.
OI Beckett, Stephen/0000-0002-4410-2960
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1664-302X
PD SEP 3
PY 2018
VL 9
AR 1850
DI 10.3389/fmicb.2018.01850
SC Microbiology
UT WOS:000443428900001
PM 30233501
ER

PT J
AU Emerling, CA
AF Emerling, Christopher A.
TI Regressed but Not Gone: Patterns of Vision Gene Loss and Retention in
   Subterranean Mammals
SO INTEGRATIVE AND COMPARATIVE BIOLOGY
DT Article; Proceedings Paper
CT Symposium on Evolution in the Dark - Unifying Understanding of Eye Loss
   at the Annual Meeting of the
   Society-for-Integrative-and-Comparative-Biology
CY JAN 03-07, 2018
CL San Francisco, CA
ID BLIND MOLE-RAT; SPALACOPUS-CYANUS; SPALAX-EHRENBERGI; VISUAL-SYSTEM;
   COLOR-VISION; OPSIN GENES; EYE; MUTATIONS; EVOLUTION; IDENTIFICATION
AB Regressive evolution involves the degradation of formerly useful traits as organisms invade novel ecological niches. In animals, committing to a strict subterranean habit can lead to regression of the eyes, likely due to a limited exposure to light. Several lineages of subterranean mammals show evidence of such degeneration, which can include decreased organization of the retina, malformation of the lens, and subcutaneous positioning of the eye. Advances in DNA sequencing have revealed that this regression co-occurs with a degradation of genomic loci encoding visual functions, including protein-coding genes. Other dim light-adapted vertebrates with normal ocular anatomy, such as nocturnal and aquatic species, also demonstrate evidence of visual gene loss, but the absence of comparative studies has led to the untested assumption that subterranean mammals are special in the degree of this genomic regression. Additionally, previous studies have shown that not all vision genes have been lost in subterranean mammals, but it is unclear whether they are under relaxed selection and will ultimately be lost, are maintained due to pleiotropy or if natural selection is favoring the retention of the eye and certain critical underlying loci. Here I report that vision gene loss in subterranean mammals tends to be more extensive in quantity and differs in distribution from other dim light-adapted mammals, although some committed subterranean mammals demonstrate significant overlap with nocturnal microphthalmic species. In addition, blind subterranean mammals retain functional orthologs of non-pleiotropic visual genes that are evolving at rates consistent with purifying selection. Together, these results suggest that although living underground tends to lead to major losses of visual functions, natural selection is maintaining genes that support the eye, perhaps as an organ for circadian and/or circannual entrainment.
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 1540-7063
EI 1557-7023
PD SEP
PY 2018
VL 58
IS 3
BP 441
EP 451
DI 10.1093/icb/icy004
SC Zoology
UT WOS:000451996200008
PM 29697812
ER

PT J
AU Ricart, AM
   Sanmarti, N
   Perez, M
   Romero, J
AF Ricart, Aurora M.
   Sanmarti, Neus
   Perez, Marta
   Romero, Javier
TI Multilevel assessments reveal spatially scaled landscape patterns
   driving coastal fish assemblages
SO MARINE ENVIRONMENTAL RESEARCH
DT Article
DE Coastal seascape; Fragmentation; Rocky reefs; Seagrass; Spatial
   heterogeneity; Species-environment interaction
ID JERSEY ENGLISH-CHANNEL; LINEAR MIXED MODELS; REEF FISH; SEAGRASS
   LANDSCAPES; POSIDONIA-OCEANICA; HABITAT CHARACTERISTICS; ECOLOGY;
   MARINE; ENVIRONMENT; SEASCAPE
AB Ecological research, particularly in marine environments, tends to focus on single habitats and often single spatial scales, and thus not account for ecological processes operating at multiple spatial scales. Here we aim to explore how coastal fish assemblages are influenced by landscape patterns integrating multiple spatial scales, to assess the strength of these associations and to identify the most relevant spatial scales at which these associations occur. We use a multiscale approach through multilevel modelling to evaluate the association of landscape metrics with fish assemblages, at three nested spatial scales, in temperate coastal seascapes composed of seagrass meadows, sandy bottoms and rocky reefs. Landscape composition metrics, expressed as cover of vegetated habitats, significantly influenced fish assemblages at small (metres) and intermediate (hundred of metres) scales, while landscape configuration metrics did it at all three scales assessed (from metres to kilometres). Species richness was only influenced by small scale landscape patterns (cover of rocky reefs, positive association), whereas total abundance was associated with landscape patterns measured at small and intermediate scales, encompassing metrics associated with landscape composition (rocky reef cover, positive association), and those indicating landscape heterogeneity (negative association). Similarly, the abundances of different functional groups were influenced by metrics consistent with their mobility and their ecological and behavioural traits at all the spatial scales assessed. These results show how landscape patterns influence coastal fish assemblages, and particularly show that spatially scaled landscape patterns, measured in complex ecological systems as a whole, act simultaneously but not always equally on species assemblages.
OI Ricart, Aurora M/0000-0001-7769-1661
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0141-1136
EI 1879-0291
PD SEP
PY 2018
VL 140
BP 210
EP 220
DI 10.1016/j.marenvres.2018.06.015
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology;
   Toxicology
UT WOS:000447579500022
PM 30251645
ER

PT J
AU McClain, CR
   Nunnally, C
   Chapman, ASA
   Barry, JP
AF McClain, Craig R.
   Nunnally, Clifton
   Chapman, Abbie S. A.
   Barry, James P.
TI Energetic increases lead to niche packing in deep-sea wood falls
SO BIOLOGY LETTERS
DT Article
DE functional diversity; trait diversity; species-energy; productivity;
   deep sea; community assembly
ID SPECIES-RICHNESS; DIVERSITY; PRODUCTIVITY; SIZE; ASSEMBLAGES; ECOSPACE;
   FOSSIL
AB Mechanisms leading to variation in diversity over energetic gradients continue to challenge ecologists. Changes in diversity may reflect the environmental capacity to support species' coexistence through increased niche packing or niche space expansion. Current ecological theory predicts that increases in energy may lead to both scenarios but not their relative strengths. We use experimental deep-sea, wood-fall communities, where energy supply can be controlled, to test for the importance of niche expansion and packing in functional space over an energetic gradient. Invertebrate communities were identified and counted from 16 Acacia sp. logs ranging in size from 0.6 to 20.6 kg in mass (corresponding to energy availability) deployed at 3203 m in the Pacific Ocean for 5 years. We use four fundamental energetic specieslevel functional traits-food source, trophic category, motility and tiering- to characterize species niches. Increases in energy on wood falls lead to increases in species richness. This higher species richness resulted from a substantial increase in mean niche overlap, suggesting that increases in energy may afford reduced competition.
OI McClain, Craig/0000-0003-0574-428X
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1744-9561
EI 1744-957X
PD SEP
PY 2018
VL 14
IS 9
AR 20180294
DI 10.1098/rsbl.2018.0294
SC Life Sciences & Biomedicine - Other Topics; Environmental Sciences &
   Ecology; Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000446255400002
PM 30209040
ER

PT J
AU Gong, Y
   Bai, JL
   Yang, HT
   Zhang, WD
   Xiong, YW
   Ding, P
   Qin, S
AF Gong, Yuan
   Bai, Juan-Luan
   Yang, Huan-Ting
   Zhang, Wen-Di
   Xiong, You-Wei
   Ding, Peng
   Qin, Sheng
TI Phylogenetic diversity and investigation of plant growth-promoting
   traits of actinobacteria in coastal salt marsh plant rhizospheres from
   Jiangsu, China
SO SYSTEMATIC AND APPLIED MICROBIOLOGY
DT Article
DE Coastal salt marsh; Actinobacteria; 16S rRNA gene; Diversity; Plant
   growth promoting
ID HALOPHYTE LIMONIUM-SINENSE; ZEA-MAYS L.; SP NOV.; ACC DEAMINASE;
   MAXIMUM-LIKELIHOOD; STREPTOMYCES SPP.; NATURAL-PRODUCTS; RHIZOBACTERIA;
   BACTERIA; SOIL
AB Actinobacteria from special habitats are of interest due to their producing of bioactive compounds and diverse ecological functions. However, little is known of the diversity and functional traits of actinobacteria inhabiting coastal salt marsh soils. We assessed actinobacterial diversity from eight coastal salt marsh rhizosphere soils from Jiangsu Province, China, using culture-based and 16S rRNA gene high throughput sequencing (HTS) methods, in addition to evaluating their plant growth-promoting (PGP) traits of isolates. Actinobacterial sequences represented 2.8%-43.0% of rhizosphere bacterial communities, as determined by HTS technique. The actinobacteria community comprised 34 families and 79 genera. In addition, 196 actinobacterial isolates were obtained, of which 92 representative isolates were selected for further 16S rRNA gene sequencing and phylogenetic analysis. The 92 strains comprised seven suborders, 12 families, and 20 genera that included several potential novel species. All representative strains were tested for their ability of producing indole acetic acid (IAA), siderophores, 1-aminocyclopropane- 1 -carboxylate deaminase (ACCD), hydrolytic enzymes, and phosphate solubilization. Based on the presence of multiple PGP traits, two strains, Streptomyces sp. KLBMP 50051 and Micromonospora sp. KLBMP 50019 were selected for inoculation of wheat seeds grown under salt stress. Both strains promoted seed germination, and KLBMP 50019 significantly enhanced seedling growth under NaC1 stress. Our study demonstrates that coastal salt marsh rhizosphere soils harbor a diverse reservoir of actinobacteria that are potential resources for the discovery of novel species and functions. Moreover, several of the isolates identified here are good candidates as PGP bacteria that may contribute to plant adaptions to saline soils. (C) 2018 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0723-2020
PD SEP
PY 2018
VL 41
IS 5
BP 516
EP 527
DI 10.1016/j.syapm.2018.06.003
SC Biotechnology & Applied Microbiology; Microbiology
UT WOS:000444471100011
PM 29934111
ER

PT J
AU Wagner, P
   Plotnick, RE
   Lyons, SK
AF Wagner, Peter
   Plotnick, Roy E.
   Lyons, S. Kathleen
TI Evidence for Trait-Based Dominance in Occupancy among Fossil Taxa and
   the Decoupling of Macroecological and Macroevolutionary Success
SO AMERICAN NATURALIST
DT Article
DE occupancy; dominance; macroecology; speciation; fossil record
ID MARINE ANIMAL GENERA; SPECIES ABUNDANCE DISTRIBUTIONS; GEOGRAPHIC RANGE
   SIZE; PHANEROZOIC TRENDS; NICHE CONSTRUCTION; EXTINCTION RISK;
   DIVERSITY; EVOLUTION; DIVERSIFICATION; REINFORCEMENT
AB Biological systems provide examples of differential success among taxa, from ecosystems with a few dominant species (ecological success) to clades that possess far more species than sister clades (macroevolutionary success). Macroecological success, the occupation by a species or clade of an unusually high number of areas, has received less attention. If macroecological success reflects heritable traits, then successful species should be related. Genera composed of species possessing those traits should occupy more areas than genera with comparable species richness that lack such traits. Alternatively, if macroecological success reflects autapomorphic traits, then generic occupancy should be a by-product of species richness among genera and occupancy of constituent species. We test this using Phanerozoic marine invertebrates. Although temporal patterns of species and generic occupancy are strongly correlated, inequality in generic occupancy typically is greater than expected. Genus-level patterns cannot be explained solely with species-level patterns. Within individual intervals, deviations between the observed and expected generic occupancy correlate with the number of lithological units (stratigraphic formations), particularly after controlling for geographic range and species richness. However, elevated generic occupancy is unrelated to or negatively associated with either generic geographic ranges or within-genus species richness. Our results suggest that shared traits among congeneric species encourage short-term macroecological success without generating short-term macroevolutionary success. A broad niche may confer high occupancy but does not necessarily promote speciation.
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0003-0147
EI 1537-5323
PD SEP
PY 2018
VL 192
IS 3
BP E120
EP E138
DI 10.1086/697642
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000442316100003
PM 30125228
ER

PT J
AU Wong, JSY
   Chan, YKS
   Ng, CSL
   Tun, KPP
   Darling, ES
   Huang, DW
AF Wong, Joy S. Y.
   Chan, Y. K. Samuel
   Ng, C. S. Lionel
   Tun, Karenne P. P.
   Darling, Emily S.
   Huang, Danwei
TI Comparing patterns of taxonomic, functional and phylogenetic diversity
   in reef coral communities
SO CORAL REEFS
DT Article
DE Biodiversity; Community assembly; Functional traits; Phylogeny;
   Scleractinia; Species richness
ID AUSTRALIAN SCLERACTINIAN CORALS; CNIDARIA ANTHOZOA SCLERACTINIA; RAOS
   QUADRATIC ENTROPY; SOUTH CHINA SEA; SPECIES RICHNESS; DISSIMILARITY
   COEFFICIENTS; BIODIVERSITY HOTSPOTS; FISH COMMUNITIES; UNIFIED APPROACH;
   MULTIPLE TRAITS
AB Biodiversity defines the variety of living organisms on this planet and is often quantified by the total number of species. However, species richness is insufficient in accounting for the differences in evolutionary history and the functions species contribute to the ecosystem. To address this shortcoming, phylogenetic diversity and functional diversity are increasingly being quantified and studied to inform ecological theory and conservation prioritisation. For scleractinian reef corals, congruence, mismatch and complementarity among different biodiversity components remain unknown, but recently available trait and phylogenetic data provide a robust test of these relationships. Here, we examine the taxonomic, functional and phylogenetic diversity of corals across a gradient of diversity in Singapore. Relationships among the biodiversity components at 25 reef sites are compared to identify patterns of mismatch or congruence for testing the precision of using one as a proxy for another. Furthermore, we examine community assembly of corals using null models derived from randomised community data. Our results show that correlations among biodiversity components are generally positive but weak, with species-dependent (nonabundance-weighted) metrics more strongly correlated with one another than species-independent (abundance-weighted) measures. No single biodiversity component could predict another precisely to be used as a reliable proxy for coral communities. Therefore, if trait diversity and evolutionary history were to be set as conservation targets, it is essential to maximise functional diversity and phylogenetic diversity explicitly when identifying areas or assemblages for management. Null models reveal the presence of more-than-expected similarities in trait combinations and evolutionary relationships among species in most reef communities. These findings suggest that environmental filtering under high levels of coastal development and sedimentation may be associated with coral community composition on Singapore's reefs. Our approach provides new insights into the relationships between different components of coral diversity and has important applications for marine conservation planning.
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0722-4028
EI 1432-0975
PD SEP
PY 2018
VL 37
IS 3
BP 737
EP 750
DI 10.1007/s00338-018-1698-6
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000441845500013
ER

PT J
AU Smith, DAE
   Si, XF
   Smith, YCE
   Kalle, R
   Ramesh, T
   Downs, CT
AF Smith, David A. Ehlers
   Si, Xingfeng
   Smith, Yvette C. Ehlers
   Kalle, Riddhika
   Ramesh, Tharmalingam
   Downs, Colleen T.
TI Patterns of avian diversity across a decreasing patch-size gradient in a
   critically endangered subtropical forest system
SO JOURNAL OF BIOGEOGRAPHY
DT Article
DE alpha and beta diversity; birds; ecological thresholds; generalists;
   Habitat heterogeneity; indicator species; land-use change; nestedness;
   specialists; turnover
ID BIRD SPECIES RICHNESS; FRAGMENTED LANDSCAPES; HABITAT FRAGMENTATION;
   FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; SEED-DISPERSAL; BETA DIVERSITY; BIODIVERSITY
   CONSERVATION; GLOBAL PATTERNS; ATLANTIC FOREST; ISLAND
AB Aim: We investigated habitat heterogeneity and patterns of avian taxonomic and functional diversity change across a decreasing patch-size gradient in a critically endangered, fragmented forest-system to elucidate: (1) habitat patch-size and structural drivers of avian diversity change, (2) potential patch-size thresholds at which avian diversity and habitat heterogeneity changes occurred and (3) avian species/communities within thresholds that indicated distinct patch-size categories.
   Location: Indian Ocean Coastal Belt, South Africa.
   Methods: We conduced habitat-structure and fixed-radius point-count surveys during the avian breeding season across 123 habitat patches (range 0.06-386.9 ha). We calculated taxonomic and functional diversity/patch (alpha) using a distance matrix of all traits present in the avian community (gamma) and described community change across the patch-size gradient (beta). We compared linear regressions of patch-size effects on avian functional alpha-diversity and habitat-structural heterogeneity to segmented regression at five bands, determined by mean patch sizes responsible for provisioning avian functional alpha-diversity at <50%, 50%-62.5%, 62.5%-75%, 75%-87.5% and 87.5%-100% of avian functional gamma-diversity to explore patch-size thresholds, and tested for significant avian indicator species of categories identified.
   Results: Avian taxonomic and functional alpha-diversity significantly decreased with decreasing patch size and habitat heterogeneity; correlations between taxonomic and functional diversity declines and a positive significant influence of habitat heterogeneity on avian functional diversity indicated selective extinction pressure on niches and concomitant functional traits. Species turnover significantly increased in smaller patches. Segmented regressions of patch size-effect on avian functional diversity and habitat heterogeneity out-performed linear regressions at three patch-size thresholds (157, 96 and 9 ha). Forest-dependent specialists were significant indicators of high-diversity patches >90 ha. Species characterizing small patches <9 ha were generalists, but many were also present in larger patches, highlighting nested-community subsets of alpha-diversity.
   Main conclusions: Specialized niches and concomitant species became locally extinct at patch-size thresholds. We present replicable methodology and recommendations for conservation of forest systems using a critically endangered biome containing disproportionately high avifauna.
RI Downs, Colleen/A-7770-2010
OI Downs, Colleen/0000-0001-8334-1510; Ehlers Smith,
   Yvette/0000-0002-2564-7359; Si, Xingfeng/0000-0003-4465-2759; Ehlers
   Smith, David/0000-0002-6357-0751
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0305-0270
EI 1365-2699
PD SEP
PY 2018
VL 45
IS 9
BP 2118
EP 2132
DI 10.1111/jbi.13245
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Physical Geography
UT WOS:000443394200012
ER

PT J
AU Dessier, A
   Dupuy, C
   Kerric, A
   Mornet, F
   Authier, M
   Bustamante, P
   Spitz, J
AF Dessier, Aurelie
   Dupuy, Christine
   Kerric, Anais
   Mornet, Francoise
   Authier, Matthieu
   Bustamante, Paco
   Spitz, Jerome
TI Variability of energy density among mesozooplankton community: New
   insights in functional diversity to forage fish
SO PROGRESS IN OCEANOGRAPHY
DT Article
DE Bay of Biscay; Profitability; Copepods; Prey-predator relationship;
   Fisheries
ID PROXIMATE-COMPOSITION; CALANUS-FINMARCHICUS; MARINE ZOOPLANKTON; PELAGIC
   FISH; JUNK-FOOD; NORTH-SEA; BAY; BISCAY; PREY; ANCHOVY
AB To explore some aspects of mesozooplankton functional diversity, this study quantified energy density during the springtime in the Bay of Biscay both between different species and between different size-classes. Energy densities of copepod species (Centropages typicus, Anomalocera patersoni, Calanus helgolandicus, and Labidocera wollastoni), as well as anchovy eggs (Engraulis encrasicolus) ranged from 0.5 to 6.7 kJ/g wet weight (ww). Considering size-classes, energy densities varied from 0.74 to 1.26 kJ/g ww. Energy density of C. helgolandicus exhibited a spatial pattern with the highest values in the plume of the Gironde estuary. In contrast, no spatial pattern of energy density has been detected considering size-classes. Our results showed that the mesozooplankton cannot be considered as a homogeneous resource in terms of quality. During spring, some species and some geographical areas seem thus to be more profitable to predators than others. We argued that the energy density is a key functional trait of mesozooplankton species. Finally, we discussed how interspecific and spatial variability of energy density among the mesozooplankton community can have important implications on fish population dynamics.
OI Bustamante, Paco/0000-0003-3877-9390
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0079-6611
PD SEP
PY 2018
VL 166
SI SI
BP 121
EP 128
DI 10.1016/j.pocean.2017.10.009
SC Oceanography
UT WOS:000442979000012
ER

PT J
AU Alster, CJ
   Weller, ZD
   von Fischer, JC
AF Alster, Charlotte J.
   Weller, Zachary D.
   von Fischer, Joseph C.
TI A meta-analysis of temperature sensitivity as a microbial trait
SO GLOBAL CHANGE BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE activation energy; Arrhenius; ecological theory; functional traits;
   macromolecular rate theory; microbial trait; Q10
ID MACROMOLECULAR RATE THEORY; ENZYME-CATALYZED RATES; SOIL RESPIRATION;
   BACTERIA; DEPENDENCE; DECOMPOSITION; COMMUNITIES; RESPONSES; GROWTH;
   ADAPTATION
AB Traits-based approaches in microbial ecology provide a valuable way to abstract organismal interaction with the environment and to generate hypotheses about community function. Using macromolecular rate theory (MMRT), we recently identified that temperature sensitivity can be characterized as a distinct microbial trait. As temperature is fundamental in controlling biological reactions, variation in temperature sensitivity across communities, organisms, and processes has the potential to vastly improve understanding of microbial response to climate change. These microbial temperature sensitivity traits include the heat capacity (<mml:msubsup>CP double dagger</mml:msubsup>), temperature optimum (T-opt), and point of maximum temperature sensitivity (TSmax), each of which provide unique insights about organismal response to changes in temperature. In this meta-analysis, we analyzed the distribution of these temperature sensitivity traits from bacteria, fungi, and mixed communities across a variety of biological systems (e.g., soils, oceans, foods, wastewater treatment plants) in order to identify commonalities in temperature responses across these diverse organisms and reaction rates. Our analysis of temperature sensitivity traits from over 350 temperature response curves reveals a wide distribution of temperature sensitivity traits, with T-opt and TSmax well within biological relevant temperatures. We find that traits vary significantly depending on organism type, microbial diversity, source environment, and biological process, with higher temperature sensitivity found in fungi than bacteria and in less diverse systems. Carbon dioxide production was found to be less temperature sensitive than denitrification, suggesting that changes in temperature will have a potentially larger impact on nitrogen-related processes. As climate changes, these results have important implications for basic understanding of the temperature sensitivity of biological reactions and for ecological understanding of species' trait distributions, as well as for improved treatment of temperature sensitivity in models.
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 1354-1013
EI 1365-2486
PD SEP
PY 2018
VL 24
IS 9
BP 4211
EP 4224
DI 10.1111/gcb.14342
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000441746900027
PM 29888841
ER

PT J
AU Gourtay, C
   Chabot, D
   Audet, C
   Le Delliou, H
   Quazuguel, P
   Claireaux, G
   Zambonino-Infante, JL
AF Gourtay, Clemence
   Chabot, Denis
   Audet, Celine
   Le Delliou, Herve
   Quazuguel, Patrick
   Claireaux, Guy
   Zambonino-Infante, Jose-Luis
TI Will global warming affect the functional need for essential fatty acids
   in juvenile sea bass (Dicentrarchus labrax)? A first overview of the
   consequences of lower availability of nutritional fatty acids on growth
   performance
SO MARINE BIOLOGY
DT Article
ID SALMON SALMO-SALAR; TROUT ONCORHYNCHUS-MYKISS; DIETARY FISH-OIL;
   SEABREAM SPARUS-AURATA; VEGETABLE-OILS; CLIMATE-CHANGE; RAINBOW-TROUT;
   LIPID SOURCES; LONG-CHAIN; BLOOD-FLOW
AB Global climate changes have led to a depletion in omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (n-3 PUFA) in marine phytoplankton that-with food web transfers-could negatively impact fish performance. The aim of this study was to assess the effect of a reduction in the dietary availability of n-3 PUFA on growth performance, organ allometry, and fatty acid composition in juvenile European sea bass (Dicentrarchus labrax) raised at two different temperatures: 15 A degrees C (natural conditions) and 20 A degrees C (global warming scenario). Fish were fed for 5 months with two isoenergetic and isoproteic diets: a reference diet (RD; 1.65% n-3 PUFA on a dry matter basis, DM) used as a proxy of trophic networks where n-3 PUFA were plentiful, and a lower n-3 PUFA diet (LD; 0.73% n-3 PUFA on DM) designed to mimic the expected decrease in n-3 PUFA sources resulting from global climate changes. Results showed decreasing growth rates and slight changes in the muscle polar lipid profile in LD-fed sea bass juveniles, whereas neutral lipids were more affected over the long term. The relative masses of the heart and gastrointestinal system were higher at 20 A degrees C, while liver mass was higher at 15 A degrees C in LD-fed juveniles. However, the mesenteric fat of RD-fed juveniles was higher at 15 A degrees C. Altogether the results suggest that sea bass juveniles are able to implement physiological mechanisms to cope with a decrease in dietary n-3 PUFA and are able to improve growth at the higher temperature, even with a decreased availability of n-3 PUFA. The temperature-driven increase in growth is also observed under the restricted n-3 PUFA diet, and this is accompanied by significant effects on organ allometry and FA profiles. This may indicate the presence of some metabolic costs that remain to be evaluated, but which illustrate that the combination of warming temperatures and n-3 PUFA depletion has significant effects on life history traits.
RI Audet, Celine/F-5192-2011; Chabot, Denis/A-2145-2019
OI Quazuguel, Patrick/0000-0003-3503-2347; ZAMBONINO-INFANTE, Jose
   Luis/0000-0001-8436-4773
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0025-3162
EI 1432-1793
PD SEP
PY 2018
VL 165
IS 9
AR 143
DI 10.1007/s00227-018-3402-3
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000442025100002
ER

PT J
AU Dai, WF
   Zhang, JJ
   Qiu, QF
   Chen, J
   Yang, W
   Ni, S
   Xiong, JB
AF Dai, Wen-Fang
   Zhang, Jin-Jie
   Qiu, Qiong-Fen
   Chen, Jiong
   Yang, Wen
   Ni, Sui
   Xiong, Jin-Bo
TI Starvation stress affects the interplay among shrimp gut microbiota,
   digestion and immune activities
SO FISH & SHELLFISH IMMUNOLOGY
DT Article
DE Shrimp gut microbiota; Starvation stress; Immune activity; Interspecies
   interaction; Functional pathways
ID SHORT-TERM STARVATION; PACIFIC WHITE SHRIMP; LITOPENAEUS-VANNAMEI;
   INTESTINAL MICROBIOTA; EUKARYOTIC MICROBIOTA; FEED DEPRIVATION;
   HUMAN-NUTRITION; DISEASE; METABOLISM; INFECTION
AB Aquatic animals are frequently suffered from starvation due to restricted food availability or deprivation. It is currently known that gut microbiota assists host in nutrient acquisition. Thus, exploring the gut microbiota responses would improve our understanding on physiological adaptation to starvation. To achieve this, we investigated how the gut microbiota and shrimp digestion and immune activities were affected under starvation stress. The results showed that the measured digestion activities in starved shrimp were significantly lower than in normal cohorts; while the measured immune activities exhibited an opposite trend. A structural equation modeling (SEM) revealed that changes in the gut bacterial community were directly related to digestive and immune enzyme activities, which in turn markedly affected shrimp growth traits. Notably, several gut bacterial indicators that characterized the shrimp nutrient status were identified, with more abundant opportunistic pathogens in starved shrimp, although there were no statistical differences in the overall diversity and the structures of gut bacterial communities between starved and normal shrimp. Starved shrimp exhibited less connected and cooperative interspecies interaction as compared with normal cohorts. Additionally, the functional pathways involved in carbohydrate and protein digestion, glycan biosynthesis, lipid and enzyme metabolism remarkably decreased in starved shrimp. These attenuations could increase the susceptibility of starved shrimp to pathogens infection. In summary, this study provides novel insights into the interplay among shrimp digestion, immune activities and gut microbiota in response to starvation stress.
OI Xiong, Jinbo/0000-0003-0645-8058
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 1050-4648
EI 1095-9947
PD SEP
PY 2018
VL 80
BP 191
EP 199
DI 10.1016/j.fsi.2018.05.040
SC Fisheries; Immunology; Marine & Freshwater Biology; Veterinary Sciences
UT WOS:000440958100022
PM 29803665
ER

PT J
AU Naidoo, G
AF Naidoo, Gonasageran
TI Ecophysiological responses of six coastal dune species along the eastern
   seaboard of South Africa
SO AFRICAN JOURNAL OF ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE chlorophyll fluorescence; gas exchange; photoinhibition; sclerophylly;
   water potential; water relations
ID CHLOROPHYLL FLUORESCENCE; PLANTS; GROWTH; WATER; LIMITATION; MORTALITY;
   FLORIDA; YIELD
AB Ecophysiological responses of six co-occurring dune species were investigated in a field study to determine whether they exhibit similar functional traits in response to environmental stressors. The species included Brachylaena discolor DC, Chrysanthemoides monilifera (L.), Scaevola plumieri (L.) Vahl, Canavalia maritima (Aubl.) Thouars, Gazania rigens (L.) Gaertn. and Cyperus esculentis L. Carbon dioxide exchange was saturated at 1,800molm(-2)s(-1) in S.plumieri and at 1,000-1,300molm(-2)s(-1) in the others. Maximal CO2 exchange occurred during mid-morning. Midday stomatal closure occurred in S.plumieri, C.monilifera and B.discolor, while stomatal regulation was achieved by maintaining low conductance. Photoinhibition was minimized by efficient mechanisms for light dissipation. Species such as S.plumieri, C.maritima and B.discolor exhibited sclerophylly, a trait for survival in saline and nutrient- and water-deficient environments. Concentrations of Na+ and Cl-1 were high in C.monilifera, G.rigens, B.discolor and S.plumieri, while the high C:N ratio in S.plumieri and C.esculentis suggested nitrogen deficiency. The responses of the six species to environmental stressors in terms of light use, gas exchange, ion and water relations and degree of sclerophylly suggest similar strategies for survival in the dune environment.
   Resume Nous avons etudie les reponses eco-physiologiques de six especes coexistant dans les dunes lors d'une recherche sur le terrain pour determiner si elles presentent des caracteristiques fonctionnelles semblables en reponse a des facteurs de stress environnementaux. Ces especes comprenaient Brachylaena discolor DC, Chrysanthemoides monilifera (L.), Scaevola plumieri (L.) Vahl,Canavalia maritima (Aubl.) Thouars, Gazania rigens (L.) Gaertn. et Cyperus esculentis L. L'echange de dioxyde de carbone etait sature a 1800molm(-2)s(-1) chez S.plumieri et entre 1,000-1,300molm(-2)s(-1) chez les autres. L'echange maximal de CO2 avait lieu en milieu de matinee. Une fermeture des stomates avait lieu en milieu de journee chez S.plumieri, C.monilifera et B.discolor, alors que la regulation des stomates se faisait en conservant une faible conductance. La photo-inhibition etait reduite au minimum par des mecanismes efficaces de dissipation de la lumiere. Des especes comme S. plumieri, C. maritima et B. discolor presentaient de la sclerophyllie, une caracteristique permettant la survie dans des environnements salins, deficients en eau et en nutriments. Les concentrations en Na+ and Cl(-1)etaient elevees chez C. monilifera, G. rigens, B. discolor et S. plumieri, alors que le taux eleve de C/N chez S. plumieri et C. esculentis suggeraient un manque d'azote. Les reponses des six especes aux facteurs de stress environnementaux en termes d'utilisation de la lumiere, d'echanges gazeux, de rapport ion et eau et de degre de sclerophyllie suggerent des strategies comparables pour la survie dans l'environnement des dunes.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0141-6707
EI 1365-2028
PD SEP
PY 2018
VL 56
IS 3
BP 507
EP 517
DI 10.1111/aje.12487
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000440898700010
ER

PT J
AU O'Brien, BS
   Mello, K
   Litterer, A
   Dijkstra, JA
AF O'Brien, Brandon S.
   Mello, Kristen
   Litterer, Amber
   Dijkstra, Jennifer A.
TI Seaweed structure shapes trophic interactions: A case study using a
   mid-trophic level fish species
SO JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL MARINE BIOLOGY AND ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE Habitat structure; Functional traits; Foundation species; Kelp; Turf
   algae; Morphology
ID HABITAT STRUCTURE; ECOSYSTEM ENGINEERS; TAUTOGOLABRUS-ADSPERSUS;
   COMMUNITY ECOLOGY; FUNCTIONAL TRAITS; FORAGING SUCCESS; MARINE
   ECOSYSTEM; PREY MORTALITY; KELP FORESTS; COMPLEXITY
AB Biogenic habitat structure, such as that created by foundation macrophytes, shapes the interactions of higher trophic level organisms by creating three-dimensional refuge spaces. In recent decades, many kelp habitats have transformed into turf-dominated communities. This represents a fundamental change in the overall habitat structure in these communities, with an unknown impact on upper trophic level organisms. We investigated how macroalgae morphology affects a common residential mid-trophic level wrasse, Tautogolabrus adspersus (cunner), which utilizes macroalgae for both refuge and foraging. Three studies were conducted: in situ behavioral video observations, a refuge choice experiment, and a foraging efficiency experiment. Video observations revealed that in kelp-dominated and mixed habitat types cunner use macroalgae more often for refuge than for foraging, but in turf-dominated habitats refuge and foraging events were equal. In these habitats, refuge-seeking was more often associated with a tall, morphologically simple kelp. The refuge choice experiment supported our video observations with cunner preferentially seeking refuge beneath taller but less morphologically complex algae instead of shorter filamentous forms. In predation trials, macroalgae complexity did not significantly affect the number of prey the fish captured. Our results provide evidence that the refuge-seeking behavior of this residential mid-trophic level fish may be impacted by the ongoing shifts in macroalgae dominance in the Gulf of Maine. Loss of its preferred refuge (tall, canopy-forming kelps) may force it to use the less-preferred introduced turf algae instead. However, whether turf provides sufficient protection for this species remains unclear. With the ongoing loss of kelp in temperate coastal ecosystems worldwide, it is important to understand the potential indirect effects that changes in habitat structure will have on the trophic interactions of upper level organisms.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0022-0981
EI 1879-1697
PD SEP
PY 2018
VL 506
BP 1
EP 8
DI 10.1016/j.jembe.2018.05.003
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000440960500001
ER

PT J
AU Moraes, PC
   Zilius, M
   Benelli, S
   Bartoli, M
AF Moraes, Paula Carpintero
   Zilius, Mindaugas
   Benelli, Sara
   Bartoli, Marco
TI Nitrification and denitrification in estuarine sediments with
   tube-dwelling benthic animals
SO HYDROBIOLOGIA
DT Article
DE Bioturbation; Corophium insidiosum; Chironomus plumosus; Nitrification;
   Denitrification; Benthic flux
ID AMPHIPOD COROPHIUM-VOLUTATOR; CHIRONOMUS-PLUMOSUS LARVAE; ISOTOPE
   PAIRING-TECHNIQUE; EUTROPHIC LAKE SEDIMENT; ECOSYSTEM ENGINEERS; AQUATIC
   ECOSYSTEMS; MARINE-SEDIMENTS; NUTRIENT FLUXES; NITROGEN; BIOTURBATION
AB Burrowing benthic animals belonging to the same functional group may produce species-specific effects on microbially mediated nitrogen (N) processes depending upon different ecological traits. We investigated the effects of two tube-dwelling organisms, amphipods (Corophium insidiosum) and chironomid larvae (Chironomus plumosus), on benthic N cycling in bioturbated estuarine sediments. Aims of this work were to analyze the interactions among burrowers and N-related microbial processes in two distinct sedimentary environments colonized by benthic animals with different ecological traits. We hypothesized higher rates of nitrification and higher coupled nitrification-denitrification in sediments with C. insidiosum due to continuous ventilation rates. We expected higher denitrification of water column nitrate in sediments with C. plumosus due to lower and intermittent ventilation activity and lower oxygen levels in burrows. To this purpose, we combined process-specific (nitrification and denitrification) with net N flux measurements in intact and reconstructed sediments. Sediments with C. insidiosum had higher rates of oxygen demand and of potential nitrification and higher concentration of pore water NH4 (+) as compared to sediments with C. plumosus. Sediments with both species displayed comparable net N-2 fluxes, mostly sustained by respiration of water column NO3 (-) in sediments with chironomid larvae and by NO3 (-) produced within sediments in sediments with corophiid amphipods. Corophium insidiosum stimulated nitrification nearly 15-fold more as compared to C. plumosus. Overall, our results demonstrate that sediments with burrowing fauna may display similar rates of denitrification, but underlying mechanisms may deeply vary and be species-specific.
OI Benelli, Sara/0000-0002-1684-4609; bartoli, marco/0000-0002-5022-6206
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0018-8158
EI 1573-5117
PD SEP
PY 2018
VL 819
IS 1
BP 217
EP 230
DI 10.1007/s10750-018-3639-3
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000434373400014
ER

PT J
AU Ilarri, MI
   Amorim, L
   Souza, AT
   Sousa, R
AF Ilarri, Martina I.
   Amorim, Luis
   Souza, Allan T.
   Sousa, Ronaldo
TI Physical legacy of freshwater bivalves: Effects of habitat complexity on
   the taxonomical and functional diversity of invertebrates
SO SCIENCE OF THE TOTAL ENVIRONMENT
DT Article
DE Macrozoobenthos; Homogenization; Asian clam; Diversity; Non-native
   species; Native species
ID CLAM CORBICULA-FLUMINEA; RIVER MINHO ESTUARY; BENTHIC COMMUNITIES;
   MACROINVERTEBRATE ASSEMBLAGES; EPIBENTHIC ASSEMBLAGES; IBERIAN
   PENINSULA; MOLLUSCAN FAUNA; INVASIVE ZEBRA; BODY-SIZE; ECOSYSTEM
AB Bivalves may play a major role in structuring aquatic communities. This may be especially relevant in aquatic communities dominated by non-native invasive bivalves, which can contribute to the increase of habitat homogenization. In this study, we assess how habitat homogenization, through the reduction of empty bivalve shells identities, influences the macroinvertebrate assemblages. Towards this end, a manipulative experiment with the empty shells of two native (Potomida littoralis and Unio delphinus) and one non-native (Corbicula fluminea) species was performed. Seven treatments were prepared, three of them consisting of homogeneous substrates using shells of one species, and four of them consisting in heterogeneous substrates using more than one species. The associated fauna colonizing different treatments was analyzed through taxonomic and trait-based approaches. Our results showed that the substrate complexity influenced the density of macroinvertebrates, with the heterogeneous treatments significantly yielding more dense assemblages. Also, the trait patterns differed among the levels of habitat heterogeneity, influencing mainly organisms that feed on microphytes of both small and big sizes, that inhabit areas with slow to moderate water flow, and that have short and long live cycles. Further, the functional diversity was not influenced by the substrate heterogeneity. Therefore, the habitat homogenization, through the accumulation of non-native C. flumineaempty shells in the river bottom, did not affect the functional diversity of the macroinvertebrate assemblages. (C) 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
RI Souza, Allan/I-8799-2012; CBMA, CBMA/J-1937-2016
OI Souza, Allan/0000-0002-1851-681X; CBMA, CBMA/0000-0002-2841-2678; Sousa,
   Ronaldo/0000-0002-5961-5515; Ilarri, Martina/0000-0001-6780-8221
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 0048-9697
EI 1879-1026
PD SEP 1
PY 2018
VL 634
BP 1398
EP 1405
DI 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.04.070
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000433153600143
PM 29710639
ER

PT J
AU Howarth, LM
   Waggitt, JJ
   Bolam, SG
   Eggleton, J
   Somerfield, PJ
   Hiddink, JG
AF Howarth, L. M.
   Waggitt, J. J.
   Bolam, S. G.
   Eggleton, J.
   Somerfield, P. J.
   Hiddink, J. G.
TI Effects of bottom trawling and primary production on the composition of
   biological traits in benthic assemblages
SO MARINE ECOLOGY PROGRESS SERIES
DT Article
DE Interactive effects; Ecosystem function; Ecosystem services; Fishing
   impacts; Fuzzy coding; Macroecology; Multiple stressors
ID MONITORING-SYSTEM VMS; BIOMASS SIZE SPECTRA; CLIMATE-CHANGE; SEA
   BENTHOS; FUNCTIONAL REDUNDANCY; COMMUNITY STRUCTURE; MARINE ECOSYSTEMS;
   FISH COMMUNITIES; GLOBAL ANALYSIS; FRESH-WATER
AB Although many studies have investigated the effects of disturbance and environmental drivers on marine ecosystems, comparatively few have studied their interactions. Using fuzzy coded biological traits, we compared the functional composition, diversity and evenness of benthic communities in the English Channel and in the Celtic and Irish Seas across interacting gradients of bottom trawling and primary production. Fuzzy correspondence analysis indicated greater similarity in trait composition at sites of high trawling pressure than at those of low trawling. In contrast, the analysis revealed no relationship between trait composition and primary production. Trawling and primary production had no effect on the traits 'longevity', 'sediment position', or 'feeding mode'. However, trawling had negative effects on all modalities within the trait 'living habit', and these effects were strongest for attached and epifaunal organisms but weakest for burrow- and tube-dwelling species. Trawling also negatively affected most modalities within the trait 'maximum weight', with strongest effects for organisms weighing between <0.1 g and up to 1 kg. Conversely, trawling positively affected organisms weighing >10 kg. For the trait 'bioturbation', upward conveyors were positively related with primary production, whilst other modalities exhibited no clear pattern. Because trawling affected some traits more than others, community biomass was less evenly distributed across traits in highly trawled areas, which resulted in lower levels of functional diversity and evenness. Overall, the effects of bottom trawling were greater in areas of high primary production.
OI Hiddink, Jan Geert/0000-0001-7114-830X
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0171-8630
EI 1616-1599
PD AUG 23
PY 2018
VL 602
BP 31
EP 48
DI 10.3354/meps12690
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology;
   Oceanography
UT WOS:000446468000003
ER

PT J
AU Kandratavicius, N
   de Ward, CP
   Venturini, N
   Gimenez, L
   Rodriguez, M
   Muniz, P
AF Kandratavicius, Noelia
   Pastor de Ward, Catalina
   Venturini, Natalia
   Gimenez, Luis
   Rodriguez, Marcel
   Muniz, Pablo
TI Response of estuarine free-living nematode assemblages to organic
   enrichment: an experimental approach
SO MARINE ECOLOGY PROGRESS SERIES
DT Article
DE Free-living nematodes; Spirulina platensis; Eutrophication; Laguna de
   Rocha; Uruguay
ID ANIMAL-SEDIMENT RELATIONSHIPS; BENTHIC TROPHIC STATUS; FISH-FARM IMPACT;
   DEEP-SEA; BIOCHEMICAL-COMPOSITION; MICROCOSM EXPERIMENTS;
   MEDITERRANEAN-SEA; MARINE-SEDIMENTS; COASTAL LAGOONS; MATURITY INDEX
AB Organic enrichment, especially from anthropogenic sources, is one of the current threats to coastal marine biodiversity. Organic enrichment occurs mainly in sheltered soft bottoms, characterized by fine sediments, and results in multiple changes in the benthic habitat, including hypoxia and an increased concentration of compounds that are toxic to marine invertebrates. We report on the results of a microcosm-based experiment (duration = 30 d), quantifying the effects of organic enrichment on taxonomic and functional diversity of nematode assemblages from an open/closed coastal lagoon of South America (Rocha Lagoon, Uruguay). In open/closed lagoons, the input of organic matter becomes a major disturbance due the limitation in water renewal. In our experiment, enrichment led to reductions in abundance, richness and trophic diversity of the nematode assemblage. Rapid reductions in total abundance (after 4 d) were registered, while richness decreased only towards the end of the experiment (similar to 30 d). Trophic changes were characterized by loss of predators/omnivores and dominance of selective deposit-feeders and epigrowth-feeders. By contrast, we did not find any selective effect of enrichment associated with life history traits (e.g. maturity index). Overall, these findings have 2 important implications for the conservation and monitoring of the health of coastal lagoons: first, monitoring of nematode assemblages at the genus level is sufficient to detect enrichment effects; second, an index of trophic diversity would be a good indicator of the effects of enrichment on natural communities.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0171-8630
EI 1616-1599
PD AUG 23
PY 2018
VL 602
BP 117
EP 133
DI 10.3354/meps12699
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology;
   Oceanography
UT WOS:000446468000009
ER

PT J
AU Zhao, M
   Yang, JX
   Mao, TY
   Zhu, HH
   Xiang, L
   Zhang, J
   Chen, LQ
AF Zhao, Mei
   Yang, Ju-Xiang
   Mao, Tian-Yu
   Zhu, Huan-Huan
   Xiang, Lin
   Zhang, Jie
   Chen, Long-Qing
TI Detection of Highly Differentiated Genomic Regions Between Lotus
   (Nelumbo nucifera Gaertn.) With Contrasting Plant Architecture and Their
   Functional Relevance to Plant Architecture
SO FRONTIERS IN PLANT SCIENCE
DT Article
DE Nelumbo nucifera; genetic resources; plant architecture; whole genome
   re-sequencing; cell morphology
ID FLOWERING PLANTS; CELL-DIVISION; GROWTH; EXPRESSION; DOMESTICATION;
   ARABIDOPSIS; GENES; ACID; IDENTIFICATION; ELONGATION
AB The lotus (Nelumbo nucifera Gaertn.) is one of the most economically and ornamentally important perennial aquatic plants. Plant architecture is an important trait for lotus classification, cultivation, breeding, and applications. In this study, traits representing plant architecture were measured in 390 lotus germplasms for 3 years. According to the phenotypic distribution, 21 large architecture (LA) and 22 small architecture (SA) germplasms exhibiting extreme phenotypes were selected as representatives of plant architecture. Microscopy analyses revealed that LA lotuses possessed far more vertical cells and longer cell lengths than SA lotuses, and there was a closer linear relationship between vertical cell number and plant architecture than cell length and plant architecture. Furthermore, based on whole genome re-sequencing data from 10 LA and 10 SA lotus germplasms, fixation index (F-ST) genome scan identified 11.02 Mb of genomic regions that were highly differentiated between the LA and SA lotus groups. Chi-square test revealed that 17,154 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and 1,554 insertions and deletions (InDels) showed distinct allelic distribution between the LA and SA lotus groups within these regions. A total of 126 variants with distinct allelic distribution in the highly differentiated region were predicted to cause amino acid changes in 60 genes. Among the 41 genes with functional annotation, the expression patterns of six genes involved in cell division and cell wall construction were confirmed using quantitative reverse-transcription PCR (qRT-PCR). In addition, 34 plant architecture-associated InDel markers were developed and verified in the remaining 11 LA and 12 SA lotus plant architecture representatives. This study identified promising functional markers and candidates for molecular breeding and will facilitate further elucidation of the genetic mechanisms underlying plant architecture in the lotus.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1664-462X
PD AUG 20
PY 2018
VL 9
AR 1219
DI 10.3389/fpls.2018.01219
SC Plant Sciences
UT WOS:000442096000002
PM 30177946
ER

PT J
AU Ashford, OS
   Kenny, AJ
   Frojan, CRSB
   Bonsall, MB
   Horton, T
   Brandt, A
   Bird, GJ
   Gerken, S
   Rogers, AD
AF Ashford, Oliver S.
   Kenny, Andrew J.
   Frojan, Christopher R. S. Barrio
   Bonsall, Michael B.
   Horton, Tammy
   Brandt, Angelika
   Bird, Graham J.
   Gerken, Sarah
   Rogers, Alex D.
TI Phylogenetic and functional evidence suggests that deep-ocean ecosystems
   are highly sensitive to environmental change and direct human
   disturbance
SO PROCEEDINGS OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY B-BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES
DT Article
DE supertree; functional traits; community phylogenetics; climate change;
   bottom trawling; deep sea
ID PARTICLE-SIZE DIVERSITY; COMMUNITY STRUCTURE; CLIMATE-CHANGE;
   COMPETITIVE-EXCLUSION; BENTHIC BIODIVERSITY; SEA BENTHOS; EVOLUTION;
   PATTERNS; SOFTWARE; PREDATION
AB An understanding of the balance of interspecific competition and the physical environment in structuring organismal communities is crucial because those communities structured primarily by their physical environment typically exhibit greater sensitivity to environmental change than those structured predominantly by competitive interactions. Here, using detailed phylogenetic and functional information, we investigate this question in macrofaunal assemblages from Northwest Atlantic Ocean continental slopes, a high seas region projected to experience substantial environmental change through the current century. We demonstrate assemblages to be both phylogenetically and functionally under-dispersed, and thus conclude that the physical environment, not competition, may dominate in structuring deep-ocean communities. Further, we find temperature and bottom trawling intensity to be among the environmental factors significantly related to assemblage diversity. These results hint that deep-ocean communities are highly sensitive to their physical environment and vulnerable to environmental perturbation, including by direct disturbance through fishing, and indirectly through the changes brought about by climate change.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0962-8452
EI 1471-2954
PD AUG 15
PY 2018
VL 285
IS 1884
AR 20180923
DI 10.1098/rspb.2018.0923
SC Life Sciences & Biomedicine - Other Topics; Environmental Sciences &
   Ecology; Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000441725900010
PM 30068675
ER

PT J
AU van Duyl, FC
   Mueller, B
   Meesters, EH
AF van Duyl, Fleur C.
   Mueller, Benjamin
   Meesters, Erik H.
TI Spatio-temporal variation in stable isotope signatures (delta C-13 and
   delta N-15) of sponges on the Saba Bank
SO PEERJ
DT Article
DE Sponge diet; Stable isotopes; Benthic-pelagic coupling; Saba Bank
ID DISSOLVED ORGANIC-CARBON; CORAL-REEF SPONGES; NITROGEN-FIXATION; MARINE
   SPONGES; CARIBBEAN SEA; SYMBIOTIC CYANOBACTERIA; MICROBIAL COMMUNITIES;
   INORGANIC NITROGEN; NUTRIENT FLUXES; NICHE STRUCTURE
AB Sponges are ubiquitous on coral reefs, mostly long lived and therefore adaptive to changing environmental conditions. They feed on organic matter withdrawn from the passing water and they may harbor microorganisms (endosymbionts), which contribute to their nutrition. Their diets and stable isotope (SI) fractionation determine the SI signature of the sponge holobiont. Little is known of spatio-temporal variations in SI signatures of delta C-13 and delta N-15 in tropical sponges and whether they reflect variations in the environment. We investigated the SI signatures of seven common sponge species with different functional traits and their potential food sources between 15 and 32 m depth along the S-SE and E-NE side of the Saba Bank, Eastern Caribbean, in October 2011 and October 2013. SI signatures differed significantly between most sponge species, both in mean values and in variation, indicating different food preferences and/or fractionation, inferring sponge species-specific isotopic niche spaces. In 2011, all sponge species at the S-SE side were enriched in delta C-13 compared to the E-NE side. In 2013, SI signatures of sponges did not differ between the two sides and were overall lighter in delta C-13 and delta N-15 than in 2011. Observed spatio-temporal changes in SI in sponges could not be attributed to changes in the SI signatures of their potential food sources, which remained stable with different SI signatures of pelagic (particulate organic matter (POM): delta C-13 -24.9%0, delta N-15 +4.3%o) and benthic-derived food (macroalgae: delta C-13 -15.4%o, delta N-15 +0.8%o). Enriched delta C-13 signatures in sponges at the S-SE side in 2011 are proposed to be attributed to predominantly feeding on benthic-derived C. This interpretation was supported by significant differences in water mass constituents between sides in October 2011. Elevated NO3 and dissolved organic matter concentrations point toward a stronger reef signal in reef overlying water at the S-SE than N-NE side of the Bank in 2011. The depletions of delta C-13 and delta N-15 in sponges in October 2013 compared to October 2011 concurred with significantly elevated POM concentrations. The contemporaneous decrease in delta N-15 suggests that sponges obtain their N mostly from benthic-derived food with a lower delta N-15 than pelagic food. Average proportional feeding on available sources varied between sponge species and ranged from 20% to 50% for benthic and 50% to 80% for pelagic-derived food, assuming trophic enrichment factors of 0.5%0 +/- sd 0.5 for delta C-13 and 3%o +/- sd 0.5 for delta N-15 for sponges. We suggest that observed variation of SI in sponges between sides and years were the result of shifts in the proportion of ingested benthic- and pelagic-derived organic matter driven by environmental changes. We show that sponge SI signatures reflect environmental variability in space and time on the Saba Bank and that SI of sponges irrespective of their species-specific traits move in a similar direction in response to these environmental changes.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 2167-8359
PD AUG 14
PY 2018
VL 6
AR e5460
DI 10.7717/peerj.5460
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000441506600012
PM 30128208
ER

PT J
AU Bernik, BM
   Pardue, JH
   Blum, MJ
AF Bernik, Brittany M.
   Pardue, John H.
   Blum, Michael J.
TI Soil erodibility differs according to heritable trait variation and
   nutrient-induced plasticity in the salt marsh engineer Spartina
   alterniflora
SO MARINE ECOLOGY PROGRESS SERIES
DT Article
DE Coastal eutrophication; Coastal protection; Ecosystem engineering;
   Ecosystem genetics; Erosion; Extended phenotype; Restoration; Salt marsh
ID SMOOTH CORDGRASS CULTIVARS; PHENOTYPIC PLASTICITY; ECOSYSTEM GENETICS;
   PANICUM-HEMITOMON; SHEAR-STRENGTH; ROOT TRAITS; PLANT; EROSION;
   RESTORATION; ACCUMULATION
AB Use of landform engineers for habitat restoration has often resulted in unanticipated outcomes. It is possible that departures from expectation arise because applications do not adequately account for the influence of heritable and non-heritable phenotypic variation on ecosystem attributes. In this study, we performed a common garden greenhouse experiment to determine whether soil shear strength-a characteristic linked to erosion resistance-varies according to heritable and plastic trait expression in Spartina alterniflora grown under contrasting nutrient regimes. We detected heritable variation across a broad spectrum of functional traits, including nutrient uptake. We also found that S. alterniflora exhibited trait-specific differences in nutrient-induced phenotypic plasticity. Heritable trait differences and plasticity together explained approximately 70% of the ob served variation in soil shear strength. Soil shear strength increased when plants received more nu trients, but the influence of heritable variation on soil shear strength was equal to or larger than that of nutrient-induced plasticity. These findings illustrate that heritable and non-heritable trait expression can potentially govern the fate of marsh ecosystems, which suggests that consideration should be given to both factors when deploying landform engineers for coastal restoration.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0171-8630
EI 1616-1599
PD AUG 9
PY 2018
VL 601
BP 1
EP 14
DI 10.3354/meps12689
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology;
   Oceanography
UT WOS:000441331000001
ER

PT J
AU McGinty, N
   Barton, AD
   Record, NR
   Finkel, ZV
   Irwin, AJ
AF McGinty, Niall
   Barton, Andrew D.
   Record, Nicholas R.
   Finkel, Zoe, V
   Irwin, Andrew J.
TI Traits structure copepod niches in the North Atlantic and Southern Ocean
SO MARINE ECOLOGY PROGRESS SERIES
DT Article
DE Copepods; Niche; Diet; Body size; Diapause; MaxEnt; North Atlantic;
   Southern Ocean
ID ZOOPLANKTON SIZE STRUCTURE; CALANUS-FINMARCHICUS; CLIMATE-CHANGE;
   TURBULENT ENVIRONMENTS; SPECIES DISTRIBUTIONS; SEASONAL SUCCESSION;
   DISTRIBUTION MODELS; COMMUNITY STRUCTURE; ECOLOGICAL NICHES; FUNCTIONAL
   TRAITS
AB Realised niches describe the environmental and biotic conditions that a species occupies. Among marine zooplankton, species traits, including body size, dietary mode (herbivore, omnivore, or carnivore), and diapause strategy are expected to influence the realised niche of a species. To date, realised niches are known for only a small number of copepod species. Here we quantify the realised niches of 88 copepod species measured by the Continuous Plankton Recorder (CPR) in the North Atlantic and Southern Ocean using Maximum Entropy (MaxEnt) modelling. We estimate the univariate mean niche, niche breadth of copepods for several important environmental variables, and assess the relative effects of several key zooplankton traits on the mean niche. Sea surface temperature (SST) contributed the most information to the description of niches on average across all species, with the rank importance of the remaining variables varying between regions. In the North Atlantic SST, depth, salinity and chlorophyll niches separated omnivores and herbivores from carnivores while in the Southern Ocean niche differences across dietary modes were found for chlorophyll and wind stress only. Diapausing copepods were found to occur in colder temperatures compared with non-diapausing taxa, likely because of their capacity for accumulating lipids. A strong negative body size-niche breadth relationship was found only for diapausing copepods, suggesting that larger multi-year generation species are more reliant on a specific temperature range to successfully reach diapause. Our analysis demonstrates strong connections between copepod traits and their realised niches in natural populations.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0171-8630
EI 1616-1599
PD AUG 9
PY 2018
VL 601
BP 109
EP 126
DI 10.3354/meps12660
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology;
   Oceanography
UT WOS:000441331000008
ER

PT J
AU Jones, KR
   Klein, CJ
   Halpern, BS
   Venter, O
   Grantham, H
   Kuempel, CD
   Shumway, N
   Friedlander, AM
   Possingham, HP
   Watson, JEM
AF Jones, Kendall R.
   Klein, Carissa J.
   Halpern, Benjamin S.
   Venter, Oscar
   Grantham, Hedley
   Kuempel, Caitlin D.
   Shumway, Nicole
   Friedlander, Alan M.
   Possingham, Hugh P.
   Watson, James E. M.
TI The Location and Protection Status of Earth's Diminishing Marine
   Wilderness
SO CURRENT BIOLOGY
DT Article
ID CLIMATE-CHANGE; BIODIVERSITY; CONSERVATION; FISHERIES; LAST; ECOSYSTEMS;
   DIVERSITY; FOOTPRINT; DECLINES; REVEALS
AB As human activities increasingly threaten biodiversity [1, 2], areas devoid of intense human impacts are vital refugia [3]. These wilderness areas contain high genetic diversity, unique functional traits, and endemic species [4-7]; maintain high levels of ecological and evolutionary connectivity [8-10]; and may be well placed to resist and recover from the impacts of climate change [11-13]. On land, rapid declines in wilderness [3] have led to urgent calls for its protection [3, 14]. In contrast, little is known about the extent and protection of marine wilderness [4, 5]. Here we systematically map marine wilderness globally by identifying areas that have both very little impact (lowest 10%) from 15 anthropogenic stressors and also a very low combined cumulative impact from these stressors. We discover that similar to 13% of the ocean meets this definition of global wilderness, with most being located in the high seas. Recognizing that human influence differs across ocean regions, we repeat the analysis within each of the 16 ocean realms [15]. Realm-specific wilderness extent varies considerably, with >16 million km(2) (8.6%) in the Warm Indo-Pacific, down to < 2,000 km(2) (0.5%) in Temperate Southern Africa. We also show that the marine protected area estate holds only 4.9% of global wilderness and 4.1% of realm-specific wilderness, very little of which is in biodiverse ecosystems such as coral reefs. Proactive retention of marine wilderness should now be incorporated into global strategies aimed at conserving biodiversity and ensuring that large-scale ecological and evolutionary processes continue.
OI klein, carissa/0000-0002-6299-6451
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 0960-9822
EI 1879-0445
PD AUG 6
PY 2018
VL 28
IS 15
BP 2506
EP +
DI 10.1016/j.cub.2018.06.010
SC Biochemistry & Molecular Biology; Cell Biology
UT WOS:000440787800033
PM 30057308
ER

PT J
AU Velez, P
   Espinosa-Asuar, L
   Figueroa, M
   Gasca-Pineda, J
   Aguirre-von-Wobeser, E
   Eguiarte, LE
   Hernandez-Monroy, A
   Souza, V
AF Velez, Patricia
   Espinosa-Asuar, Laura
   Figueroa, Mario
   Gasca-Pineda, Jaime
   Aguirre-von-Wobeser, Eneas
   Eguiarte, Luis E.
   Hernandez-Monroy, Abril
   Souza, Valeria
TI Nutrient Dependent Cross-Kingdom Interactions: Fungi and Bacteria From
   an Oligotrophic Desert Oasis
SO FRONTIERS IN MICROBIOLOGY
DT Article
DE arid environment ecology; cooperation; microbial interactions;
   metabolome; nutrient availability; stress-gradient hypothesis
ID MICROBIAL COMMUNITY COMPOSITION; MUSHROOM CANTHARELLUS-CIBARIUS;
   ARBUSCULAR MYCORRHIZAL FUNGI; STRESS-GRADIENT HYPOTHESIS;
   ASPERGILLUS-NIGER; PINUS-SYLVESTRIS; SOIL BACTERIA; LEAF-LITTER;
   IN-VITRO; NUTRITIONAL-REQUIREMENTS
AB Microbial interactions play a key role in ecosystem functioning, with nutrient availability as an important determinant. Although phylogenetically distant bacteria and fungi commonly co-occur in nature, information on their cross-kingdom interactions under unstable, extreme environments remains poor. Hence, the aims of this work were to evaluate potential in vitro interactions among fungi and bacteria isolated from a phosphorous oligotrophic aquatic system in the Cuatro Cienegas Basin, Mexico, and to test the nutrients-based shifts. We assessed growth changes in bacteria (Aeromonas and Vibrio) and fungi (Coprinellus micaceus, Cladosporium sp., and Aspergillus niger) on co-cultures in relation to monocultures under diverse nutrient scenarios on Petri dishes. Interactions were explored using a network analysis, and a metabolome profiling for specific taxa. We identified nutrient-dependent patterns, as beneficial interactions dominated in low-nutrients media and antagonistic interactions dominated in rich media. This suggests that cross-kingdom synergistic interactions might favor microbial colonization and growth under low nutrient conditions, representing an adaptive trait to oligotrophic environments. Moreover, our findings agree with the stress-gradient hypothesis, since microbial interactions shifted from competition to cooperation as environmental stress (expressed as low nutrients) increased. At a functional level consistent differences were detected in the production of secondary metabolites, agreeing with plate bioassays. Our results based on culture experiments, provides evidence to understand the complexity of microbial dynamics and survival in phosphorous-depleted environments.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1664-302X
PD AUG 6
PY 2018
VL 9
AR 1755
DI 10.3389/fmicb.2018.01755
SC Microbiology
UT WOS:000440791000001
PM 30131780
ER

PT J
AU McNeish, RE
   Kim, LH
   Barrett, HA
   Mason, SA
   Kelly, JJ
   Hoellein, TJ
AF McNeish, R. E.
   Kim, L. H.
   Barrett, H. A.
   Mason, S. A.
   Kelly, J. J.
   Hoellein, T. J.
TI Microplastic in riverine fish is connected to species traits
SO SCIENTIFIC REPORTS
DT Article
ID LAURENTIAN GREAT-LAKES; PLASTIC DEBRIS; MARINE-ENVIRONMENT;
   SYNTHETIC-FIBERS; SEWAGE-SLUDGE; URBAN RIVER; ACCUMULATION; ECOSYSTEM;
   IMPACTS; IDENTIFICATION
AB Microplastic is a contaminant of concern worldwide. Rivers are implicated as major pathways of microplastic transport to marine and lake ecosystems, and microplastic ingestion by freshwater biota is a risk associated with microplastic contamination, but there is little research on microplastic ecology within freshwater ecosystems. Microplastic uptake by fish is likely affected by environmental microplastic abundance and aspects of fish ecology, but these relationships have rarely been addressed. We measured the abundance and composition of microplastic in fish and surface waters from 3 major tributaries of Lake Michigan, USA. Microplastic was detected in fish and surface waters from all 3 sites, but there was no correlation between microplastic concentrations in fish and surface waters. Rather, there was a significant effect of functional feeding group on microplastic concentration in fish. Neogobius melanostomus (round goby, a zoobenthivore) had the highest concentration of gut microplastic (19 particles fish-1) compared to 10 other fish taxa measured, and had a positive linear relationship between body size and number of microplastic particles. Surface water microplastic concentrations were lowest in the most northern, forested watershed, and highest in the most southern, agriculturally dominated watershed. Results suggest microplastic pollution is common in river food webs and is connected to species feeding characteristics. Future research should focus on understanding the movement of microplastic from point-source and diffuse sources and into aquatic ecosystems, which will support pollution management efforts on inland waters.
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 2045-2322
PD AUG 3
PY 2018
VL 8
AR 11639
DI 10.1038/s41598-018-29980-9
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000440670200002
PM 30076314
ER

PT J
AU Benito, X
   Fritz, SC
   Steinitz-Kannan, M
   Velez, MI
   McGlue, MM
AF Benito, Xavier
   Fritz, Sherilyn C.
   Steinitz-Kannan, Miriam
   Velez, Maria I.
   McGlue, Michael M.
TI Lake regionalization and diatom metacommunity structuring in tropical
   South America
SO ECOLOGY AND EVOLUTION
DT Article
DE diatom guilds; lakes; latitudinal gradient; metacommunity; topographic
   heterogeneity
ID FUNCTIONAL TRAITS; AQUATIC ORGANISMS; ECOLOGICAL GUILDS; DISPERSAL;
   FRAMEWORK; FLOODPLAIN; DIVERSITY; DIRECTIONALITY; PHYTOPLANKTON;
   CONNECTIVITY
AB Lakes and their topological distribution across Earth's surface impose ecological and evolutionary constraints on aquatic metacommunities. In this study, we group similar lake ecosystems as metacommunity units influencing diatom community structure. We assembled a database of 195 lakes from the tropical Andes and adjacent lowlands (8 degrees N-30 degrees S and 58-79 degrees W) with associated environmental predictors to examine diatom metacommunity patterns at two different levels: taxon and functional (deconstructed species matrix by ecological guilds). We also derived spatial variables that inherently assessed the relative role of dispersal. Using complementary multivariate statistical techniques (principal component analysis, cluster analysis, nonmetric multidimensional scaling, Procrustes, variance partitioning), we examined diatom-environment relationships among different lake habitats (sediment surface, periphyton, and plankton) and partitioned community variation to evaluate the influence of niche- and dispersal-based assembly processes in diatom metacommunity structure across lake clusters. The results showed a significant association between geographic clusters of lakes based on gradients of climate and landscape configuration and diatom assemblages. Six lake clusters distributed along a latitudinal gradient were identified as functional metacommunity units for diatom communities. Variance partitioning revealed that dispersal mechanisms were a major contributor to diatom metacommunity structure, but in a highly context-dependent fashion across lake clusters. In the Andean Altiplano and adjacent lowlands of Bolivia, diatom metacommunities are niche assembled but constrained by either dispersal limitation or mass effects, resulting from area, environmental heterogeneity, and ecological guild relationships. Topographic heterogeneity played an important role in structuring planktic diatom metacommunities. We emphasize the value of a guild-based metacommunity model linked to dispersal for elucidating mechanisms underlying latitudinal gradients in distribution. Our findings reveal the importance of shifts in ecological drivers across climatic and physiographically distinct lake clusters, providing a basis for comparison of broad-scale community gradients in lake-rich regions elsewhere. This may help guide future research to explore evolutionary constraints on the rich Neotropical benthic diatom species pool.
OI Benito-Granell, Xavier/0000-0003-0792-2625
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 2045-7758
PD AUG
PY 2018
VL 8
IS 16
BP 7865
EP 7878
DI 10.1002/ece3.4305
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000444946300011
PM 30250669
ER

PT J
AU Wrede, A
   Beermann, J
   Dannheim, J
   Gutow, L
   Brey, T
AF Wrede, Alexa
   Beermann, Jan
   Dannheim, Jennifer
   Gutow, Lars
   Brey, Thomas
TI Organism functional traits and ecosystem supporting services A novel
   approach to predict bioirrigation
SO ECOLOGICAL INDICATORS
DT Article
DE Bioturbation; Biogeochemical cycling; Bentho-pelagic coupling;
   Bioturbation potential; Trait based indices; Marine Strategy Framework
   Directive
ID COASTAL MARINE-SEDIMENTS; PERMEABLE SEDIMENTS; BIO-IRRIGATION;
   BIOTURBATION; BIODIVERSITY; MATTER; CARBON; SEA; DIVERSICOLOR;
   COMMUNITIES
AB Increasing anthropogenic activities on land and at sea underline the demand for easily applicable indices to effectively predict human mediated changes in ecosystem functioning. Here, we propose a novel bioirrigation index (IPc) that is based on body mass, abundance, burrow type, feeding type and injection pocket depth of bottom dwelling animals. The index was validated with combined field (in situ communities) and manipulative (single species) experiments. Results from both community and single-species experimental incubations indicate that IPc is able to predict the bioirrigation rate in different sediment types (mud, fine sand, sand). The trait-based index thus demonstrates robustness in the prediction of animal-mediated functional processes that support biogeochemical functions under variable environmental conditions. Accordingly, we argue that trait-based indices provide a useful tool for the quantitative prediction of ecosystem processes as effect traits provide a direct link to the behavioral mechanisms that drive ecosystem functioning.
OI Beermann, Jan/0000-0001-5894-6817; Wrede, Alexa/0000-0002-9369-4333
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 1470-160X
EI 1872-7034
PD AUG
PY 2018
VL 91
BP 737
EP 743
DI 10.1016/j.ecolind.2018.04.026
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000444520600072
ER

PT J
AU Guidi, F
   Pezzolesi, L
   Vanucci, S
AF Guidi, Flavio
   Pezzolesi, Laura
   Vanucci, Silvana
TI Microbial dynamics during harmful dinoflagellate Ostreopsis cf. ovata
   growth: Bacterial succession and viral abundance pattern
SO MICROBIOLOGYOPEN
DT Article
DE algal-bacterial associations; Dinoroseobacter; harmful dinoflagellates;
   Oceanicaulis; Ostreopsis; viruses
ID NORTHERN ADRIATIC SEA; ORGANIC-MATTER DOM; SYBR GREEN-I; ALGAL BLOOMS;
   SP-NOV.; ROSEOBACTER CLADE; COASTAL WATERS; COCHLODINIUM-POLYKRIKOIDES;
   GYMNODINIUM-CATENATUM; ALEXANDRIUM SPP.
AB Algal-bacterial interactions play a major role in shaping diversity of algal associated bacterial communities. Temporal variation in bacterial phylogenetic composition reflects changes of these complex interactions which occur during the algal growth cycle as well as throughout the lifetime of algal blooms. Viruses are also known to cause shifts in bacterial community diversity which could affect algal bloom phases. This study investigated on changes of bacterial and viral abundances, bacterial physiological status, and on bacterial successional pattern associated with the harmful benthic dinoflagellate Ostreopsis cf. ovata in batch cultures over the algal growth cycle. Bacterial community phylogenetic structure was assessed by 16S rRNA gene ION torrent sequencing. A comparison between bacterial community retrieved in cultures and that one co-occurring in situ during the development of the O. cf. ovata bloom from where the algal strain was isolated was also reported. Bacterial community growth was characterized by a biphasic pattern with the highest contributions (similar to 60%) of highly active bacteria found at the two bacterial exponential growth steps. An alphaproteobacterial consortium composed by the Rhodobacteraceae Dinoroseobacter (22.2%-35.4%) and Roseovarius (5.7%-18.3%), together with Oceanicaulis (14.2- 40.3%), was strongly associated with O. cf. ovata over the algal growth. The Rhodobacteraceae members encompassed phylotypes with an assessed mutualistic-pathogenic bimodal behavior. Fabibacter (0.7%-25.2%), Labrenzia (5.6%-24.3%), and Dietzia (0.04%-1.7%) were relevant at the stationary phase. Overall, the successional pattern and the metabolic and functional traits of the bacterial community retrieved in culture mirror those ones underpinning 0. cf. ovata bloom dynamics in field. Viral abundances increased synoptically with bacterial abundances during the first bacterial exponential growth step while being stationary during the second step. Microbial trends also suggest that viruses induced some shifts in bacterial community composition.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 2045-8827
PD AUG
PY 2018
VL 7
IS 4
AR e584
DI 10.1002/mbo3.584
SC Microbiology
UT WOS:000440928500007
PM 29484854
ER

PT J
AU Monk, WA
   Compson, ZG
   Armanini, DG
   Orlofske, JM
   Curry, CJ
   Peters, DL
   Crocker, JB
   Baird, DJ
AF Monk, Wendy A.
   Compson, Zacchaeus G.
   Armanini, David G.
   Orlofske, Jessica M.
   Curry, Colin J.
   Peters, Daniel L.
   Crocker, Jeffrey B.
   Baird, Donald J.
TI Flow velocity-ecology thresholds in Canadian rivers: A comparison of
   trait and taxonomy-based approaches
SO FRESHWATER BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE benthic macroinvertebrates; biomonitoring; flow variability; flow
   velocity threshold; traits
ID MACROINVERTEBRATE COMMUNITY RESPONSE; BIOLOGICAL TRAITS;
   BENTHIC-MACROINVERTEBRATES; CLIMATE-CHANGE; INVERTEBRATE ASSEMBLAGES;
   CONSERVATION BIOLOGY; NICHE CONSERVATISM; PHYSICAL HABITAT; SPECIES
   TRAITS; BIODIVERSITY
AB Understanding the physical and biological mechanisms contributing to flow velocity-ecology relationships is crucial for successful river management. The application of an ecological traits-based approach offers the potential to explore mechanistic linkages between aquatic communities and a hydrological gradient. To date, however, studies focused on identifying these relationships have been limited by a lack of large-scale, long-term biological data. To address this gap at a scale relevant for water policy management, we employed data from a large-scale standardised benthic monitoring programthe Canadian Aquatic Biomonitoring Networkobtained from wadeable river sites across Canada. We applied the Threshold Indicator Taxa ANalysis method to quantify the response of the macroinvertebrate community, expressed as traditional taxonomic information and also as ecological traits, along a flow velocity gradient in reference and potential reference sites. Five key findings emerged: (1) using taxa and trait modalities revealed different flow velocity thresholds, (2) trait flow velocity indicators were less variable than taxon indicators, especially for positively responding trait modalities, (3) labile and non-labile trait modalities demonstrated highly similar patterns along the flow velocity gradient, (4) taxa from 12 different orders responded negatively to flow velocity, while only EPT taxa and some dipterans responded positively to flow velocity, and (5) traits related to mobility and ecology (e.g. climber and swimmer habits, preference of cold-cool eurythermal water and ability to survive desiccation) tended to respond positively to flow velocity, while traits related to morphology, life history and ecology (e.g. sprawler and burrower habits, preference for warm eurythermal water and inability to survive desiccation) tended to respond negatively to flow velocity. Providing ecologically based flow management targets can improve management plans, anticipate ecosystem consequences of anthropogenic change and support the development of policies to mitigate anthropogenic flow alteration. While our taxon and trait modality flow indicators were developed for Canadian watersheds, our methods to develop flow indicators and thresholds are transferrable to other systems where long-term biomonitoring programs are being developed, underscoring the need for long-term biomonitoring programs to support better ecosystem management.
OI Compson, Zacchaeus/0000-0003-2015-3015; Monk, Wendy/0000-0001-9031-5433
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 0046-5070
EI 1365-2427
PD AUG
PY 2018
VL 63
IS 8
SI SI
BP 891
EP 905
DI 10.1111/fwb.13030
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000439780800012
ER

PT J
AU Sefick, SA
   Kosnicki, E
   Paller, MH
   Feminella, JW
AF Sefick, Stephen A.
   Kosnicki, Ely
   Paller, Michael H.
   Feminella, Jack W.
TI Hydrogeomorphic Reference Condition and Its Relationship
   withMacroinvertebrate Assemblages in Southeastern US Sand Hills Streams
SO JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN WATER RESOURCES ASSOCIATION
DT Article
DE geomorphology; hydrology; macroinvertebrates; trait-based ecology;
   community assembly; sand-bed; Sand Hills; coastal plains
ID PARTIAL LEAST-SQUARES; MACROINVERTEBRATE SPECIES TRAITS; COASTAL-PLAIN
   STREAMS; UNITED-STATES; LAND-COVER; BENTHIC MACROINVERTEBRATES;
   PRINCIPAL COMPONENT; URBAN STREAMS; WATER; COMMUNITIES
AB Defining stream reference conditions is integral to providing benchmarks to ecological perturbation. We quantified channel geometry, hydrologic and environmental variables, and macroinvertebrates in 62 low-gradient, SE United States (U.S.) Sand Hills (Level IV ecoregion) sand-bed streams. To identify hydrogeomorphic reference condition (HGM), we clustered channel geometry deviation from expectations given watershed area (Aws), resulting in two HGM groups discriminated by area at the top of bank (Atob) residuals <0.6m(2) and >0.6m(2) predicted to be HGM reference/nonreference streams, respectively. Two independent partial least squares discriminate analyses used (1) hydrologic/environmental variables and (2) macroinvertebrate mean trait values (mT) on 10 reference/nonreference stream pairs of similar Aws for classification validation. Nonreference streams had flashier hydrographs and altered flow magnitudes, lower organic matter, coarser substrate, higher pH/specific conductivity compared with reference streams. Macroinvertebrate assemblages corresponded to HGM groupings, with mT indicative of multivoltinism, collector-gatherer functional feeding groups, fast current-preference taxa, and lower Ephemeroptera, Plecoptera, and Trichoptera richness and biotic integrity in nonreference streams. HGM classifications in Sand Hills, sand-bed streams were determined from channel geometry. This easily implemented classification is indicative of contemporary hydrologic disturbance resulting in contrasting macroinvertebrate assemblages.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1093-474X
EI 1752-1688
PD AUG
PY 2018
VL 54
IS 4
BP 914
EP 933
DI 10.1111/1752-1688.12650
SC Engineering; Geology; Water Resources
UT WOS:000440411200013
ER

PT J
AU Heinen, JH
   van Loon, EE
   Hansen, DM
   Kissling, WD
AF Heinen, Julia H.
   van Loon, E. Emiel
   Hansen, Dennis M.
   Kissling, W. Daniel
TI Extinction-driven changes in frugivore communities on oceanic islands
SO ECOGRAPHY
DT Article
ID SEED-DISPERSAL; SPECIES RICHNESS; BODY-SIZE; BIRDS; PATTERNS;
   ANTHROPOCENE; CONSERVATION; RECRUITMENT; DEFAUNATION; GALAPAGOS
AB Global change and human expansion have resulted in many species extinctions worldwide, but the geographic variation and determinants of extinction risk in particular guilds still remain little explored. Here, we quantified insular extinctions of frugivorous vertebrates (including birds, mammals and reptiles) across 74 tropical and subtropical oceanic islands within 20 archipelagos worldwide and investigated extinction in relation to island characteristics (island area, isolation, elevation and climate) and species' functional traits (body mass, diet and ability to fly). Out of the 74 islands, 33 islands (45%) have records of frugivore extinctions, with one third (mean: 34%, range: 2-100%) of the pre-extinction frugivore community being lost. Geographic areas with more than 50% loss of pre-extinction species richness include islands in the Pacific (within Hawaii, Cook Islands and Tonga Islands) and the Indian Ocean (Mascarenes, Seychelles). The proportion of species richness lost from original pre-extinction communities is highest on small and isolated islands, increases with island elevation, but is unrelated to temperature or precipitation. Large and flightless species had higher extinction probability than small or volant species. Across islands with extinction events, a pronounced downsizing of the frugivore community is observed, with a strong extinction-driven reduction of mean body mass (mean: 37%, range: -18-100%) and maximum body mass (mean: 51%, range: 0-100%). The results document a substantial trophic downgrading of frugivore communities on oceanic islands worldwide, with a non-random pattern in relation to geography, island characteristics and species' functional traits. This implies severe consequences for ecosystem processes that depend on mutualistic plant-animal interactions, including ecosystem dynamics that result from the dispersal of large-seeded plants by large-bodied frugivores. We suggest that targeted conservation and rewilding efforts on islands are needed to halt the defaunation of large and non-volant seed dispersers and to restore frugivore communities and key ecological interactions.
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 0906-7590
EI 1600-0587
PD AUG
PY 2018
VL 41
IS 8
BP 1245
EP 1255
DI 10.1111/ecog.03462
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000440287200002
ER

PT J
AU Sara, G
   Gouhier, TC
   Brigolin, D
   Porporato, EMD
   Mangano, MC
   Mirto, S
   Mazzola, A
   Pastres, R
AF Sara, Gianluca
   Gouhier, Tarik C.
   Brigolin, Daniele
   Porporato, Erika M. D.
   Mangano, Maria Cristina
   Mirto, Simone
   Mazzola, Antonio
   Pastres, Roberto
TI Predicting shifting sustainability trade-offs in marine finfish
   aquaculture under climate change
SO GLOBAL CHANGE BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE aquaculture; mechanistic predictive models; Mediterranean Sea; regional
   climate models; seabass; trade-offs
ID EUROPEAN SEA BASS; FUNCTIONAL TRAITS; CHANGE IMPACTS; GROWTH; FUTURE;
   TEMPERATURE; INTEGRATION; METABOLISM; DEPOSITION; ECOLOGY
AB Defining sustainability goals is a crucial but difficult task because it often involves the quantification of multiple interrelated and sometimes conflicting components. This complexity may be exacerbated by climate change, which will increase environmental vulnerability in aquaculture and potentially compromise the ability to meet the needs of a growing human population. Here, we developed an approach to inform sustainable aquaculture by quantifying spatio-temporal shifts in critical trade-offs between environmental costs and benefits using the time to reach the commercial size as a possible proxy of economic implications of aquaculture under climate change. Our results indicate that optimizing aquaculture practices by minimizing impact (this study considers as impact a benthic carbon deposition >= 1g Cm-2 day(-1)) will become increasingly difficult under climate change. Moreover, an increasing temperature will produce a poleward shift in sustainability trade-offs. These findings suggest that future sustainable management strategies and plans will need to account for the effects of climate change across scales. Overall, our results highlight the importance of integrating environmental factors in order to sustainably manage critical natural resources under shifting climatic conditions.
RI Porporato, Erika/L-7797-2017
OI Porporato, Erika/0000-0001-9650-0760; Mirto, Simone/0000-0003-4707-7307;
   SARA', Gianluca/0000-0002-7658-5274; Mangano, Maria
   Cristina/0000-0001-6980-9834; Brigolin, Daniele/0000-0002-4590-8616
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 1354-1013
EI 1365-2486
PD AUG
PY 2018
VL 24
IS 8
BP 3654
EP 3665
DI 10.1111/gcb.14296
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000437284700032
PM 29723929
ER

PT J
AU Ruhi, A
   Dong, XL
   McDaniel, CH
   Batzer, DP
   Sabo, JL
AF Ruhi, Albert
   Dong, Xiaoli
   McDaniel, Courtney H.
   Batzer, Darold P.
   Sabo, John L.
TI Detrimental effects of a novel flow regime on the functional trajectory
   of an aquatic invertebrate metacommunity
SO GLOBAL CHANGE BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE Biological traits; hydrologic alteration; invertebrates; time-series
   methods
ID ECOLOGICAL CONSEQUENCES; WAVELET ANALYSIS; ENVIRONMENTAL VARIATION;
   POPULATION-DYNAMICS; COMMUNITY STABILITY; BASIC PRINCIPLES; RAPID
   EVOLUTION; RIVER NETWORK; STREAM FISH; TIME-SERIES
AB Novel flow regimes resulting from dam operations and overallocation of freshwater resources are an emerging consequence of global change. Yet, anticipating how freshwater biodiversity will respond to surging flow regime alteration requires overcoming two challenges in environmental flow science: shifting from local to riverscape-level understanding of biodiversity dynamics, and from static to time-varying characterizations of the flow regime. Here, we used time-series methods (wavelets and multivariate autoregressive models) to quantify flow-regime alteration and to link time-varying flow regimes to the dynamics of multiple local communities potentially connected by dispersal (i.e., a metacommunity). We studied the Chattahoochee River below Buford dam (Georgia, U.S.A.), and asked how flow regime alteration by a large hydropower dam may control the long-term functional trajectory of the downstream invertebrate metacommunity. We found that seasonal variation in hydropeaking synchronized temporal fluctuations in trait abundance among the flow-altered sites. Three biological trait states describing adaptation to fast flows benefitted from flow management for hydropower, but did not compensate for declines in 16 loser traits. Accordingly, metacommunity-wide functional diversity responded negatively to hydropeaking intensity, and stochastic simulations showed that the risk of functional diversity collapse within the next 4years would decrease by 17% if hydropeaking was ameliorated, or by 9% if it was applied every other season. Finally, an analysis of 97 reference and 23 dam-affected river sites across the U.S. Southeast suggested that flow variation at extraneous, human-relevant scales (12-hr, 24-hr, 1-week) is relatively common in rivers affected by hydropower dams. This study advances the notion that novel flow regimes are widespread, and simplify the functional structure of riverine communities by filtering out taxa with nonadaptive traits and by spatially synchronizing their dynamics. This is relevant in the light of ongoing and future hydrologic alteration due to climate non-stationarity and the new wave of dams planned globally.
OI Ruhi, Albert/0000-0003-4011-6457
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 1354-1013
EI 1365-2486
PD AUG
PY 2018
VL 24
IS 8
BP 3749
EP 3765
DI 10.1111/gcb.14133
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000437284700038
PM 29665147
ER

PT J
AU Day, PB
   Stuart-Smith, RD
   Edgar, GJ
   Bates, AE
AF Day, Paul B.
   Stuart-Smith, Rick D.
   Edgar, Graham J.
   Bates, Amanda E.
TI Species' thermal ranges predict changes in reef fish community structure
   during 8 years of extreme temperature variation
SO DIVERSITY AND DISTRIBUTIONS
DT Article
DE functional traits; ocean climate; resilience; Species Temperature Index;
   thermal niche; warming
ID RECENT CLIMATE-CHANGE; OCEAN-WARMING HOTSPOT; WESTERN-AUSTRALIA;
   EVOLUTIONARY RESPONSES; ROTTNEST ISLAND; RANDOM FORESTS; MARINE FISHES;
   CORAL-REEF; SHIFTS; ABUNDANCE
AB Aim: To assess whether observed thermal bounds in species' latitudinal ranges (i.e., realized thermal niches) can be used to predict patterns of occurrence and abundance changes observed during a marine heatwave, relative to other important life history and functional traits.
   Location: Rottnest Island, Western Australia.
   Methods: A time series of standardized quantitative surveys of reef fishes spanning 8years of pronounced ocean temperature change is used to test whether accurate predictions on shifts in species occupancy and abundance are possible using species traits.
   Results: Species-level responses in occurrence and abundance were closely related to the mid-point of their realized thermal niche, more so than body size, range size or trophic level. Most of the species that disappeared from survey counts during the heatwave were characterized by geographic ranges that did not extend to latitudes with temperatures equivalent to the ocean temperature peak during the heatwave. We thus find support for the hypothesis that current distribution limits are set directly or indirectly by temperature and are highly responsive to ocean temperature variability.
   Main conclusions: Our study shows that reef fish community structure can change very quickly when exposed to extreme thermal anomalies, in directions predicted from the realized thermal niche of the species present. Such predictions can thus identify species that will be most responsive to changing ocean climate. Continued warming, coupled with periodic extreme heat events, may lead to the loss of ecosystem services and ecological functions, as mobile species relocate to more hospitable climes, while less mobile species may head towards extinction.
OI Stuart-Smith, Rick/0000-0002-8874-0083
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 1366-9516
EI 1472-4642
PD AUG
PY 2018
VL 24
IS 8
BP 1036
EP 1046
DI 10.1111/ddi.12753
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000438200700001
ER

PT J
AU Schalk, CM
   Montana, CG
   Kralman, K
   Leavitt, DJ
AF Schalk, Christopher M.
   Montana, Carmen G.
   Kralman, Kelsey
   Leavitt, Daniel J.
TI Functional distance and establishment of non-native species with complex
   life cycles
SO BIOLOGICAL INVASIONS
DT Article
DE Amphibians; Larva; Life history; Morphospace; Functional traits;
   Ontogenetic niche shift
ID BIOLOGICAL INVASIONS; DESERT ANURANS; FOOD-WEB; COMPETITION; MECHANISMS;
   PREDATION; BULLFROGS; FROGS; COMMUNITIES; PLASTICITY
AB More than 80% of animals have complex life cycles and undergo distinct changes in ecology and morphology during development. The strength and type of factors regulating each life-stage may differ as an organism may occupy different niches during ontogeny. We examined the functional distance at larval and adult life-stages of two non-native anurans (Green Tree Frog [Hyla cinerea] and Bullfrog [Lithobates catesbeianus]) that have established in a Chihuahuan Desert anuran assemblage in Big Bend National Park. Both life stages of both non-native species occupied niche space outside of the native assemblage. At the larval stage, the ability of the tadpoles to utilize permanent aquatic habitats and coexist with predatory fishes differentiated the non-native species from the majority of the native species that are restricted to temporary pools. At the post-metamorphic life stage, each species appears to have established by exploiting unoccupied habitat and trophic niches in the recipient community. The arboreal habits of H. cinerea may enable it to utilize resources in microhabitats that are otherwise not used by native species because arboreal frogs are absent from this native assemblage. The large body size of post-metamorphic L. catesbeianus may enable it to utilize larger food resources that are otherwise unavailable to the smaller-bodied natives. Separate comparison of larval and adult functional traits between non-natives and the native community may help predict their potential establishment or invasion success as well as aid in the development of stage-specific control or eradication efforts.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1387-3547
EI 1573-1464
PD AUG
PY 2018
VL 20
IS 8
BP 1945
EP 1952
DI 10.1007/s10530-018-1678-3
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000437242900003
ER

PT J
AU Clinton, KE
   Mathers, KL
   Constable, D
   Gerrard, C
   Wood, PJ
AF Clinton, K. E.
   Mathers, K. L.
   Constable, D.
   Gerrard, C.
   Wood, P. J.
TI Substrate preferences of coexisting invasive amphipods, Dikerogammarus
   villosus and Dikerogammarus haemobaphes, under field and laboratory
   conditions
SO BIOLOGICAL INVASIONS
DT Article
DE Ponto-Caspian; Non-native species; Habitat selection; Crangonyx
   pseudogracilis; Killer and demon shrimp; Habitat heterogeneity
ID FRESH-WATER AMPHIPOD; LIFE-HISTORY TRAITS; KILLER SHRIMP; INTERFERENCE
   COMPETITION; GREAT-LAKES; FUNCTIONAL-RESPONSES; ECOLOGICAL IMPACTS;
   AQUATIC INVADERS; TROPHIC ECOLOGY; RISK-ASSESSMENT
AB Two Ponto-Caspian amphipods, Dikerogammarus villosus and Dikerogammarus haemobaphes, have expanded their geographical ranges from eastern Europe into Great Britain in recent years. This study represents one of the first examining the distribution and habitat preferences of coexisting populations of D. haemobaphes and D. villosus via field and laboratory experiments in the UK. Field surveys of a recently invaded lowland reservoir in the UK are complimented with ex situ laboratory mesocosm experiments examining the substrate preferences of coexisting populations of D. villosus and D. haemobaphes. Results from the field study indicated that D. haemobaphes dominated the macroinvertebrate community within the reservoir and demonstrated a strong affinity for large cobble and artificial substrates. D. villosus occurred at lower abundances but displayed a strong preference for coarse cobble substrates. A third invasive amphipod, Crangonyx pseudogracilis, was largely confined to sand/silt habitats. Laboratory mesocosm experiments clearly supported the field observations of D. villosus and D. haemobaphes with both species demonstrating a preference for cobble substrates. Results from the study highlight the importance of characterising physical habitat when investigating biological invasions and suggest that habitat availability may influence the extent and speed at which range expansion of new amphipod invaders occurs.
OI Mathers, Kate/0000-0003-3741-1439
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1387-3547
EI 1573-1464
PD AUG
PY 2018
VL 20
IS 8
BP 2187
EP 2196
DI 10.1007/s10530-018-1695-2
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000437242900020
ER

PT J
AU Forio, MAE
   Goethals, PLM
   Lock, K
   Asio, V
   Bande, M
   Thas, O
AF Forio, Marie Anne Eurie
   Goethals, Peter L. M.
   Lock, Koen
   Asio, Victor
   Bande, Marlito
   Thas, Olivier
TI Model-based analysis of the relationship between macroinvertebrate
   traits and environmental river conditions
SO ENVIRONMENTAL MODELLING & SOFTWARE
DT Article; Proceedings Paper
CT Meeting of the
   International-Environmental-Modelling-and-Software-Society (IEMSS) /
   Workshop on Data Mining Techniques for Environmental Sciences (DMTES)
CY 2016
CL Toulouse, FRANCE
DE Negative binomial regression; Feeding strategies; Flow velocity;
   Tropical island; Generalized linear models; Philippines
ID LARGE EUROPEAN RIVERS; BIOLOGICAL TRAITS; BENTHIC MACROINVERTEBRATES;
   STREAM COMMUNITIES; WATER-QUALITY; MACROECOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVE;
   INVERTEBRATE COMMUNITY; NEOTROPICAL STREAMS; ECOLOGICAL QUALITY; INITIAL
   ASSESSMENT
AB Aquatic macroinvertebrates, 18 physical-chemical water characteristics and 30 hydromorphological variables were assessed at 85 locations on Leyte island, Philippines. Biological traits derived from literature were linked to the biological samples based on four different trait estimation methods. These data were used to determine the relation with river characteristics using negative binomial regression. At least five feeding habit modalities were associated with conductivity, velocity, pH, temperature, ammonium-N concentrations, and sediment. The various methods of estimating trait abundance differ in determined major patterns and ecological implications. Therefore, the estimation method used should be explicitly described in trait-related papers to avoid misinterpretation. Trait abundance-environment relationships can be linear or non-linear and therefore a careful selection of the functional relationship should be performed. The process of extracting knowledge from data is of paramount importance as relevant ecological insights were extracted providing insights on flow, wastewater and nutrient management in the rivers. (C) 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
OI Thas, Olivier/0000-0001-6442-4089
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 1364-8152
EI 1873-6726
PD AUG
PY 2018
VL 106
SI SI
BP 57
EP 67
DI 10.1016/j.envsoft.2017.11025
SC Computer Science; Engineering; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000436636100007
ER

PT J
AU Vieira, EA
   Dias, GM
   Flores, AAV
AF Vieira, Edson A.
   Dias, Gustavo M.
   Flores, Augusto A. V.
TI Adding early-stage engineering species affects advanced-stage
   organization of shallow-water fouling assemblages
SO HYDROBIOLOGIA
DT Article
DE Historical contingency; Ecologic function; Facilitation; Competition;
   Diversity
ID BRYOZOAN BUGULA-NERITINA; REEF COMMUNITY STRUCTURE; FOOD-WEB COMPLEXITY;
   INVASION RESISTANCE; ECOSYSTEM FUNCTION; CURRENT KNOWLEDGE; MARINE
   ECOSYSTEM; NORTH-CAROLINA; DIVERSITY; FACILITATION
AB Although commonly overlooked, processes determining early patterns of species assembly may affect community dynamics and diversity at advanced states. In this study, we followed richness and community structure in experimental units pioneered by single or multiple species, within a given functional group-colonial ascidians, arborescent, and encrusting bryozoans. We tested the hypotheses that richness and community structure are positively affected by founder-richness at more advanced stages, and that such effect may depend on the functional traits of founders (more or less prone to facilitate other species). More diverse founding assemblages of arborescent bryozoans led to richer communities after 1 and 5 months of succession, with no effects observed for the other functional groups. Assemblages started by a single species were dominated by space monopolizers (encrusting bryozoans), while the ones founded by two species were characterized by a higher abundance of engineering forms (arborescent bryozoans), which may provide a physically complex substrate suitable to both the attraction and protection of other species recruits. Both effects on advanced-stage richness and community structure reflect the importance of facilitation through founder diversity and functionality in community organization.
RI Flores, Augusto/B-7092-2011
OI Flores, Augusto/0000-0001-9347-8860; Vieira, Edson/0000-0001-7991-1007
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0018-8158
EI 1573-5117
PD AUG
PY 2018
VL 818
IS 1
BP 211
EP 222
DI 10.1007/s10750-018-3612-1
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000433197400015
ER

PT J
AU Brown, JK
   Zinnert, JC
   Young, DR
AF Brown, Joseph K.
   Zinnert, Julie C.
   Young, Donald R.
TI Emergent interactions influence functional traits and success of dune
   building ecosystem engineers
SO JOURNAL OF PLANT ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE competition; coastal dunes; facilitation; intransitivity
ID PLANT-COMMUNITIES; COMPETITIVE INTRANSITIVITY; AMMOPHILA-BREVILIGULATA;
   POSITIVE INTERACTIONS; ENVIRONMENTAL-STRESS; UNIOLA-PANICULATA;
   COMPLEX-SYSTEMS; NORTH-CAROLINA; COEXISTENCE; VEGETATION
AB Aims
   Dune building processes are affected by interactions between the growth of ecosystem engineering dune grasses and environmental factors associated with disturbance such as sand burial and sea spray. Research investigating how species interactions influence dune community structure and functional trait responses in high abiotic stress environments is minimal. We investigated how species interactions influence the functional trait responses of three dominant dune grasses to common abiotic stressors.
   Methods
   We performed a multi-factorial greenhouse experiment by planting three common dune grasses (Ammophila breviligulata Fern., Uniola paniculata L. and Spartina patens Muhl.) in different interspecific combinations, using sand burial and sea spray as abiotic stressors. Sand burial was applied once at the beginning of the study. Sea spray was applied three times per week using a calibrated spray bottle. Morphological functional trait measurements (leaf elongation, maximum root length, aboveground biomass and belowground biomass) were collected at the end of the study. The experiment continued from May 2015 to August 2015.
   Important Findings
   Species interactions between A. breviligulata and U. paniculata negatively affected dune building function traits of A. breviligulata, indicating that interactions with U. paniculata could alter dune community structure. Furthermore, A. breviligulata had a negative interaction with S. patens, which decreased S. patens functional trait responses to abiotic stress. When all species occurred together, the interactions among species brought about coexistence of all three species. Our data suggest that species interactions can change traditional functional trait responses of dominant species to abiotic stress.
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 1752-9921
EI 1752-993X
PD AUG
PY 2018
VL 11
IS 4
BP 524
EP 532
DI 10.1093/jpe/rtx033
SC Plant Sciences; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000433291100002
ER

PT J
AU Li, YZ
   Cui, LJ
   Yao, X
   Ding, XH
   Pan, X
   Zhang, MY
   Li, W
   Kang, XM
AF Li, Youzhi
   Cui, Lijuan
   Yao, Xin
   Ding, Xiaohui
   Pan, Xu
   Zhang, Manyin
   Li, Wei
   Kang, Xiaoming
TI Trade-off between leaf chlorophyll and betacyanins in Suaeda salsa in
   the Liaohe estuary wetland in northeast China
SO JOURNAL OF PLANT ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE Suaeda salsa; pigment composition; soil Na+ content; Liaohe estuary
   wetland
ID PHOTOSYNTHETIC GAS-EXCHANGE; SALINITY STRESS; L.; FLUORESCENCE; LEAVES;
   GROWTH; PLANT; TOLERANCE; PIGMENTS; WATER
AB Aims
   Pigment composition is an important functional trait that can be affected by environmental factors. The objective of this study was to investigate the effect of soil salinity on pigment composition in Suaeda salsa by comparing chlorophyll and betacyanin content in the Liaohe estuary wetland, a typical coastal wetland in northeast China.
   Methods
   We investigated the plant biomass, percentage of red leaves and pigment content (chlorophyll a, chlorophyll b and betacyanins) in S. salsa in intertidal and supratidal zones of the upper, middle and lower reaches of the Liaohe estuary wetlands. The Na+ content of both the soil and plant was also measured. Full analysis of variance and multivariate analysis were used to compare differences in pigment content and Na+ content between the supratidal and intertidal zones.
   Important Findings
   Pigment composition was significantly affected by soil salinity. With increasing soil salinity, the percentage of red leaves was higher in the intertidal zone than in the supratidal zone. In all three reaches, plants had lower chlorophyll a content and higher betacyanin content in the intertidal zone than in the supratidal zone. Compared to chlorophyll a, chlorophyll b was less sensitive to soil salinity. There were no differences in chlorophyll b content between the intertidal and supratidal zones in the upper and lower reaches. Furthermore, pigment composition was associated with both the plant tissue and soil Na+ content. Compared to the supratidal zone, the intertidal zone had a higher Na+ content in plants. There was a negative relationship between plant chlorophyll content and soil Na+ content, but a positive relationship between betacyanin content and soil Na+ content. Overall, the results indicated that there might be a trade-off between leaf chlorophyll and betacyanin content in S. salsa to maintain its growth and survival in high salinity environments.
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 1752-9921
EI 1752-993X
PD AUG
PY 2018
VL 11
IS 4
BP 569
EP 575
DI 10.1093/jpe/rtx025
SC Plant Sciences; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000433291100007
ER

PT J
AU Belshe, EF
   Hoeijmakers, D
   Herran, N
   Mtolera, M
   Teichberg, M
AF Belshe, Elizabeth Fay
   Hoeijmakers, Dieuwke
   Herran, Natalia
   Mtolera, Matern
   Teichberg, Mirta
TI Seagrass community-level controls over organic carbon storage are
   constrained by geophysical attributes within meadows of Zanzibar,
   Tanzania
SO BIOGEOSCIENCES
DT Article
ID POSIDONIA-OCEANICA MEADOW; PLANT ECONOMICS SPECTRUM; ECOSYSTEM SERVICES;
   MARINE-SEDIMENTS; BLUE CARBON; UNCONSOLIDATED SEDIMENTS; MINERAL
   INTERACTIONS; GLOBALLY SIGNIFICANT; DECOMPOSITION RATES; FUNCTIONAL
   TRAITS
AB The aim of this work was to explore the feasibility of using plant functional traits to identify differences in sediment organic carbon (OC) storage within seagrass meadows. At 19 sites within three seagrass meadows in the coastal waters of Zanzibar, Tanzania, species cover was estimated along with three community traits hypothesized to influence sediment OC storage (above and belowground biomass, seagrass tissue nitrogen content, and shoot density). Sediments within four biogeographic zones (fore reef, reef flat, tidal channel, and seagrass meadow) of the landscape were characterized, and sediment cores were collected within seagrass meadows to quantify OC storage in the top 25 cm and top meter of the sediment. We identified five distinct seagrass communities that had notable differences in the plant traits, which were all residing within a thin veneer (ranging from 19 to 78 cm thick) of poorly sorted, medium to coarsely grained carbonate sands on top of carbonate rock. One community (B), dominated by Thalassodendron ciliatum, contained high amounts of above (972 +/- 74 g DW m(-2)) and belowground (682 +/- 392 g DW m(-2)) biomass composed of low-elemental-quality tissues (leaf C: N = 24.5; rhizome C: N = 97). While another community (C), dominated by small-bodied ephemeral seagrass species, had significantly higher shoot density (4178 shoots m(-2)). However, these traits did not translate into differences in sediment OC storage and across all communities the percentage of OC within sediments was similar and low (ranging from 0.15% to 0.75 %), as was the estimated OC storage in the top 25 cm (14.1 +/- 2.2 Mg C ha(-1)) and top meter (33.9 +/- 7.7 Mg C ha(-1)) of sediment. These stock estimates are considerably lower than the global average (194.2 +/- 20.2Mg C ha(-1)) reported for other seagrass ecosystems and are on the lower end of the range of estimates reported for the tropical Indo-Pacific bioregion (1.9 to 293Mg C ha(-1)). The uniformly low OC storage across communities, despite large inputs of low-quality belowground tissues in community B, indicates that the geophysical conditions of the coarse, shallow sediments at our sites were not conducive to OC stabilization and outweighed any variation in the quantity or quality of seagrass litter inputs. These results add to a growing body of evidence showing that geophysical conditions of the sediment modulate the importance of plant traits in regards to retention of OC within blue carbon ecosystems and cautions against the use of plant traits as a proxy for sediment OC storage across all seagrass ecosystems.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1726-4170
EI 1726-4189
PD JUL 27
PY 2018
VL 15
IS 14
BP 4609
EP 4626
DI 10.5194/bg-15-4609-2018
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Geology
UT WOS:000440016500001
ER

PT J
AU Bourque, JR
   Demopoulos, AWJ
AF Bourque, Jill R.
   Demopoulos, Amanda W. J.
TI The influence of different deep-sea coral habitats on sediment
   macrofaunal community structure and function
SO PEERJ
DT Article
DE Lophelia pertusa; Madrepora oculata; Octocorals; Sediment macrofauna;
   Community ecology; Functional traits; Gulf of Mexico
ID GULF-OF-MEXICO; ROCKALL TROUGH MARGIN; WATER LOPHELIA-PERTUSA; NE
   ATLANTIC; CONTINENTAL MARGINS; CARBONATE-MOUND; BIODIVERSITY; REEFS;
   HETEROGENEITY; IMPACTS
AB Deep-sea corals can create a highly complex, three-dimensional structure that facilitates sediment accumulation and influences adjacent sediment environments through altered hydrodynamic regimes. Infaunal communities adjacent to different coral types, including reef-building scleractinian corals and individual colonies of octocorals, are known to exhibit higher macrofaunal densities and distinct community structure when compared to non-coral soft-sediment communities. However, the coral types have different morphologies, which may modify the adjacent sediment communities in discrete ways. Here we address: (1) how infaunal communities and their associated sediment geochemistry compare among deep-sea coral types (Lophelia pertusa, Madrepora oculata, and octocorals) and (2) do infaunal communities adjacent to coral habitats exhibit typical regional and depth-related patterns observed in the Gulf of Mexico (GOM). Sediment push cores were collected to assess diversity, composition, numerical abundance, and functional traits of macrofauna (>300 mu m) across 450 kilometers in the GOM at depths ranging from 263-1,095 m. Macrofaunal density was highest in L. pertusa habitats, but similar between M. oculata and octocorals habitats. Density overall exhibited a unimodal relationship with depth, with maximum densities between 600 and 800 m. Diversity and evenness were highest in octocoral habitats; however, there was no relationship between diversity and depth. Infaunal assemblages and functional traits differed among coral habitats, with L. pertusa habitats the most distinct from both M. oculata and octocorals. These patterns could relate to differences in sediment geochemistry as L. pertusa habitats contained high organic carbon content but low proportions of mud compared to both M. oculata and octocoral habitats. Distance-based linear modeling revealed depth, mud content, and organic carbon as the primary factors in driving coral infaunal community structure, while geographic location (longitude) was the primary factor in functional trait composition, highlighting both the location and ecological differences of L. pertusa habitats from other coral habitats. Enhanced habitat structural complexity associated with L. pertusa and differences in localized hydrodynamic flow may contribute to the dissimilarities in the communities found among the coral types. Our results suggest a decoupling for infaunal coral communities from the typical depth-related density and diversity patterns present throughout soft-sediment habitats in the GOM, highlighting the importance of deep-sea corals in structuring unique communities in the nearby benthos.
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 2167-8359
PD JUL 20
PY 2018
VL 6
AR e5276
DI 10.7717/peerj.5276
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000439652200009
PM 30042896
ER

PT J
AU Almeida, BD
   Green, AJ
   Sebastian-Gonzalez, E
   dos Anjos, L
AF Almeida, Bia de Arruda
   Green, Andy J.
   Sebastian-Gonzalez, Esther
   dos Anjos, Luiz
TI Comparing species richness, functional diversity and functional
   composition of waterbird communities along environmental gradients in
   the neotropics
SO PLOS ONE
DT Article
ID ECOSYSTEM SERVICES; TRAIT COMBINATIONS; PARANA RIVER; WETLANDS;
   FRAMEWORK; RESPONSES; SELECTION; HABITATS; AVAILABILITY; CHARACTERS
AB Waterbirds have a major functional role in wetlands, and understanding how functional traits of waterbirds depend on environmental characteristics can facilitate management of ecosystems and their services. We investigate how the waterbird community in a Neotropical river-floodplain system responds to environmental gradients, identifying how they affect waterbird species richness, functional diversity (measured as functional dispersion) and functional composition (specific functional traits). We sampled 22 lakes in the Upper Parana floodplain system in southern Brazil, and modelled avian functional diversity and species richness as a function of environmental variables. Then we used a unified RLQ and fourth-corner analysis to evaluate environment-trait relationships. Waterbird species richness and functional diversity varied according to different environmental variables. Lake area and diversity of aquatic vegetation were associated with avian species richness, while relative abundance of grass and emergent macrophytes and mean and variation of depth were related to functional diversity. Furthermore, changes in functional diversity seemed to be mainly driven by presence of species that depend on perches for foraging (e.g. kingfishers, cormorants, and kites), whose presence was mainly associated with deep water and emergent macrophytes. Nevertheless, changes in functional diversity and functional composition did not depend on exactly the same set of environmental variables, suggesting that trait combinations (e.g. below surface feeders who feed on fish), not only specific traits, are important drivers of the variation in functional diversity between lakes. Given the observed differences in responses of species richness and functional diversity, both these diversity metrics should be used as complementary tools in ecosystem management. Furthermore, our results show that functional diversity and composition are partially coupled, suggesting that although functional diversity is influenced by the environmental filtering of particular traits, it also reflects other ecological mechanisms (e.g. competitive interactions among species).
RI Green, Andy/A-5189-2008
OI Green, Andy/0000-0002-1268-4951; Sebastian-Gonzalez,
   Esther/0000-0001-7229-1845; Almeida, Bia/0000-0001-9738-0270
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1932-6203
PD JUL 20
PY 2018
VL 13
IS 7
AR e0200959
DI 10.1371/journal.pone.0200959
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000439396900027
PM 30028866
ER

PT J
AU Endo, H
   Ogata, H
   Suzuki, K
AF Endo, Hisashi
   Ogata, Hiroyuki
   Suzuki, Koji
TI Contrasting biogeography and diversity patterns between diatoms and
   haptophytes in the central Pacific Ocean
SO SCIENTIFIC REPORTS
DT Article
ID SUB-ARCTIC PACIFIC; MARINE-PHYTOPLANKTON; NORTH PACIFIC;
   SPATIAL-PATTERNS; FUNCTIONAL-GROUP; BERING-SEA; WATERS; NUTRIENT;
   CYCLES; LIFE
AB Diatoms and haptophytes are two major phytoplankton groups, playing pivotal roles in global biogeochemical cycles and marine ecosystems. In general, diatoms have higher growth rates than haptophytes, whereas haptophytes tend to have higher nutrient uptake affinity. However, precise linkages between their ecological traits and geographical distributions remain poorly understood. Herein, we examined the basin-scale variability of the abundance and taxonomic composition of these two phytoplankton groups across 35 sites in the Pacific Ocean using DNA metabarcoding. The diatom community was generally dominated by a few genera at each sample site, whereas the haptophyte community consisted of a large number of genera in most of the sites. The coexistence of various haptophyte genera might be achieved by diversification of their ecophysiological traits such as mixotrophy. On the other hand, the diatom community might experience greater inter-genus competition due to the rapid uptake of nutrients. Our data further supports the notion that their distinct ecological strategies underlie the emergence of contrasting diversity patterns of these phytoplankton groups in the central Pacific at a basin scale.
OI Suzuki, Koji/0000-0001-5354-1044; Endo, Hisashi/0000-0003-0016-1624
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 2045-2322
PD JUL 19
PY 2018
VL 8
AR 10916
DI 10.1038/s41598-018-29039-9
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000439101600015
PM 30026492
ER

PT J
AU Isabwe, A
   Yang, JR
   Wang, YM
   Liu, LM
   Chen, HH
   Yang, J
AF Isabwe, Alain
   Yang, Jun R.
   Wang, Yongming
   Liu, Lemian
   Chen, Huihuang
   Yang, Jun
TI Community assembly processes underlying phytoplankton and
   bacterioplankton across a hydrologic change in a human-impacted river
SO SCIENCE OF THE TOTAL ENVIRONMENT
DT Article
DE Phytoplankton; Bacterioplankton; Variation partitioning analysis;
   Deterministic process; Stochastic process; Community assembly;
   Dispersal; Jiulong River
ID FRESH-WATER REALM; SUBTROPICAL RESERVOIRS; SOUTHEAST CHINA;
   CYANOBACTERIA DOMINANCE; METACOMMUNITY STRUCTURE; ENVIRONMENTAL-CHANGES;
   JIULONGJIANG RIVER; DIVERSITY PATTERNS; FUNCTIONAL TRAITS; BETA
   DIVERSITY
AB Although the influence of microbial community assembly processes on aquatic ecosystem function and biodiversity is well known, the processes that govern planktonic communities in human-impacted rivers remain largely unstudied. Here, we used multivariate statistics and a null model approach to test the hypothesis that environmental conditions and obstructed dispersal opportunities, dictate a deterministic community assembly for phytoplankton and bacterioplankton across contrasting hydrographic conditions in a subtropical mid-sized river (Jiulong River, southeast China). Variation partitioning analysis showed that the explanatory power of local environmental variables was larger than that of the spatial variables for both plankton communities during the dry season. During the wet season, phytoplankton community variation was mainly explained by local environmental variables, whereas the variance in bacterioplankton was explained by both environmental and spatial predictors. The null model based on Raup-Crick coefficients for both planktonic groups suggested little evidences of the stochastic processes involving dispersal and random distribution. Our results showed that hydrological change and landscape structure act together to cause divergence in communities along the river channel, thereby dictating a deterministic assembly and that selection exceeds dispersal limitation during the dry season. Therefore, to protect the ecological integrity of human-impacted rivers, watershed managers should not only consider local environmental conditions but also dispersal routes to account for the effect of regional species pool on local communities. (C) 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
RI Yang, Jun/E-6680-2011; CAS, KLUEH/G-8978-2016
OI Yang, Jun/0000-0002-7920-2777; 
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 0048-9697
EI 1879-1026
PD JUL 15
PY 2018
VL 630
BP 658
EP 667
DI 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.02.210
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000432467700066
PM 29494974
ER

PT J
AU Massiot-Granier, F
   Lassalle, G
   Almeida, P
   Aprahamian, M
   Castonguay, M
   Drouineau, H
   Garcia-Berthou, E
   Laffaille, P
   Lechene, A
   Lepage, M
   Limburg, K
   Lobry, J
   Rochard, E
   Rose, K
   Rosebery, J
   Rougier, T
   Waldman, J
   Wilson, K
   Lambert, P
AF Massiot-Granier, Felix
   Lassalle, Geraldine
   Almeida, Pedro
   Aprahamian, Miran
   Castonguay, Martin
   Drouineau, Hilaire
   Garcia-Berthou, Emili
   Laffaille, Pascal
   Lechene, Alain
   Lepage, Mario
   Limburg, Karin
   Lobry, Jeremy
   Rochard, Eric
   Rose, Kenneth
   Rosebery, Juliette
   Rougier, Thibaud
   Waldman, John
   Wilson, Karen
   Lambert, Patrick
TI A generic method to assess species exploratory potential under climate
   change
SO ECOLOGICAL INDICATORS
DT Article
DE Climate change; Range shift; Exploration; Participatory method;
   Composite metric; Migratory species
ID LIFE-HISTORY TRAITS; EXPERT KNOWLEDGE; AMERICAN SHAD; ANADROMOUS FISHES;
   EXTINCTION RISK; MARINE FISHES; DISPERSAL; SHIFTS; CONSERVATION;
   ATLANTIC
AB Climate, by altering the spatio-temporal distributions of suitable habitats, leads to modifications in a multitude of species ranges. In recent years, the ability of species to adjust to changing climatic conditions is of growing concern. In the present study, a generic trait-based method to assess species exploratory potential under climate change is proposed. "Exploratory potential" is here defined as the capacity of species to initiate the act of leaving their current habitats and to reach new ones outside of their range, at a rate fast enough to keep pace with climate change. The presented method is based on the calculation of the Exploratory Potential Index (EPI), a metric that combines several life-history traits into a single numeric value. Both coefficients and variables of this composite metric are flexible. They depend on the set of species under consideration through a two-step participatory expert-based procedure. A panel of experts on the species' biology, ecology and conservation is first to be constituted. Then, experts are separately consulted to validate the variables to be integrated in the composite EPI index and are asked to rank the importance of these variables relative to each other following an Analytic Hierarchy Process. Coefficients in the EPI index and scores are given a credibility distribution using a Bayesian inference model. Anadromous species are chosen as a first application case. Scripts and raw survey data are made available to readers to ease applications to other species groups.
RI Garcia-Berthou, Emili/A-5392-2008
OI Garcia-Berthou, Emili/0000-0001-8412-741X; Drouineau,
   Hilaire/0000-0001-9206-0040; Lepage, Mario/0000-0002-8996-5305;
   Lassalle, Geraldine/0000-0002-8548-7254
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1470-160X
EI 1872-7034
PD JUL
PY 2018
VL 90
BP 615
EP 623
DI 10.1016/j.ecolind.2018.03.047
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000440266100063
ER

PT J
AU Staentzel, C
   Beisel, JN
   Gallet, S
   Hardion, L
   Barillier, A
   Combroux, I
AF Staentzel, Cybill
   Beisel, Jean-Nicolas
   Gallet, Sebastien
   Hardion, Laurent
   Barillier, Agnes
   Combroux, Isabelle
TI A multiscale assessment protocol to quantify effects of restoration
   works on alluvial vegetation communities
SO ECOLOGICAL INDICATORS
DT Article
DE Ecological restoration; Fluvial hydrosystem; Functionality; Trajectory;
   Transition matrix model; Vegetation dynamics
ID FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION; FLUVIAL LANDFORMS; SPECIES
   RICHNESS; MARKOV-MODELS; RIVER; DYNAMICS; SUCCESSION; INDICATORS;
   FRAMEWORK
AB Vegetation mapping is a legal obligation in environmental monitoring prompting the need for easy-to-read methods of quantifying changes in vegetation dynamics. Transition matrix modelling provides an alternative approach to qualitative assessment promoting quantification for revealing current complex changes effects on the trajectory of ecosystems. Transition matrix models (TMMs) and two newly developed metrics, the pixel change (PCI) and zonal change (ZCI) indices, were combined into a methodological scheme that provides a multiscale assessment protocol. This protocol was applied during a field study along the Old Rhine River in order to assess complex shifts in alluvial vegetation communities in relation to restoration works and natural processes. The restoration works aim to restore lateral mobility through instream flow increase and controlled bank erosion with artificial groynes implementation. Characterisation of spatial and temporal pathways was carried out using a 'before-after control-impact' (BACI) design, and a fuzzy coding approach has shed further light on shifts in aquatic vegetation functional traits. The multiscale assessment protocol highlighted (i) an increase in alluvial habitat types, including habitats of European concern (Natura 2000), and (ii) low time-scale aquatic vegetation recovery. Both ZCI and PCI recorded high values along the restored section with controlled bank erosion, indicating strong ecosystem change. Use of functional traits detected three requirements for the successful establishment of aquatic vegetation in the restored river section, i.e. high degree of flexibility, flow variation tolerance, and fine-sediment adaptability. Subject to the reliability and availability of vegetation mapping, the method opens the possibility of an efficient tool for precisely monitoring alluvial vegetation communities and identifying pathways. It also discriminates event effects, e.g. natural process effects vs. human-induced effects. At full potential, such a protocol may reveal community responses to disturbance during conservation, restoration and management decision-making projects.
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 1470-160X
EI 1872-7034
PD JUL
PY 2018
VL 90
BP 643
EP 652
DI 10.1016/j.ecolind.2018.03.050
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000440266100066
ER

PT J
AU Antunes, C
   Diaz-Barradas, MC
   Zunzunegui, M
   Vieira, S
   Maguas, C
AF Antunes, Cristina
   Cruz Diaz-Barradas, Mari
   Zunzunegui, Maria
   Vieira, Simone
   Maguas, Cristina
TI Water source partitioning among plant functional types in a semi-arid
   dune ecosystem
SO JOURNAL OF VEGETATION SCIENCE
DT Article
DE coexistence; drought; dry conditions; functional groups; groundwater
   use; Mediterranean; sandy coastal ecosystem; soil water partitioning;
   stable isotope mixing model; water sources segregation; water-use shifts
ID SPECIES COEXISTENCE; SOIL-WATER; HALIMIUM-HALIMIFOLIUM; EXPERIMENTAL
   DROUGHT; USE-EFFICIENCY; COMMUNITIES; RESPONSES; TRAITS; VEGETATION;
   TREES
AB Question(s)The aim of this work was to characterize the main water sources used by the woody plant community of a semi-arid coastal dune ecosystem. We ask: Do the seasonal water sources used by plants differ between functional types? Does the seasonal drought promote shifts towards deeper soil layers in all plants? Does greater use of deep soil water enables the maintenance of a more favorable plant water status? Do water-sources-use strategies mirror overall drought strategies?
   LocationSemi-arid coastal dune system in Donana Biological Reserve, southwest Spain.
   MethodsWe analyzed the oxygen isotope composition of xylem water of fourteen coexisting woody species and compared it to water sources (soil water at different depths, rain and groundwater), both in spring and dry summer. Bayesian isotope mixing models were used to estimate the proportion of each water source used by plants. We tested the influence of different (categorical) traits on plants' water-source-use. We evaluated the relationships between the use of deep soil water and ecophysiological parameters related to water economy (leaf C-13 and reflectance water-index).
   ResultsA greater similarity between species was found in periods of higher water availability (spring). Contrastingly, during the dry period the traits considered showed a significant effect on the water sources used and a high inter-specific differentiation was observed. Accordingly, species clustered in five water-use functional groups, exploring water from shallower to deeper soil layers. Greater use of deep soil layers in the dry season was linked to a better seasonal maintenance of plant water status.
   ConclusionsCoexisting plant functional types segregated along a spectrum of water-source-use under extremely dry conditions, evidencing great soil water partitioning. Relevant seasonal water-use shifts towards deeper soil layers were observed, but not in all species. Furthermore, we confirmed that the water-source-use behavior accompanied broader strategies of drought resistance.
RI Vieira, Simone/H-1225-2011
OI Vieira, Simone/0000-0002-0129-4181; Zunzunegui,
   Maria/0000-0002-3815-9290
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 1100-9233
EI 1654-1103
PD JUL
PY 2018
VL 29
IS 4
BP 671
EP 683
DI 10.1111/jvs.12647
SC Plant Sciences; Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Forestry
UT WOS:000443232400010
ER

PT J
AU Goto, R
   Harrison, TA
   Foighil, DO
AF Goto, Ryutaro
   Harrison, Teal A.
   Foighil, Diarmaid O.
TI Within-host speciation events in yoyo clams, obligate commensals with
   mantis shrimps, including one that involves a change in microhabitat and
   a loss of specialized traits
SO BIOLOGICAL JOURNAL OF THE LINNEAN SOCIETY
DT Article
DE adaptation; burrow; commensalism; Galeommatoidea; habitat shift; host
   shift; specialization; Stomatopoda; symbiosis
ID FUNCTIONAL-MORPHOLOGY; SEQUENCE ALIGNMENT; REPRODUCTIVE ISOLATION;
   ECOLOGICAL SPECIATION; PEREGRINAMOR-OHSHIMAI; PHYLOGENETIC ANALYSES;
   COMPARATIVE ANATOMY; MIXED MODELS; BIVALVIA; GALEOMMATIDAE
AB Compared to host shifts, the importance of within-host cladogenesis in the diversification of symbionts remains less well understood in marine systems. Yoyo dams (Galeommatidae: Vasconiellinae) are a Glade of marine bivalves that live commensally with burrowing mantis shrimp. Almost all yoyo clams byssally-attach to the host burrow wall via a specialized hanging foot structure bearing a thread-like posterior extension. In contrast, Parabornia squillina (Vasconiellinae) byssally-attaches directly to the host shrimp and lacks a hanging foot structure. In this study, we examine phylogenetic relationships among vasconiellines by performing molecular analyses based on five genes (28S and 16S rRNA, H3, COI and ANT). We found evidence for two within-host speciation events among Floridian vasconiellines commensal with the same mantis shrimp host, Lysiosquilla scabricauda. One involved a cryptic sister species pair of burrow-wall commensals. The other involved the ectocommensal P squillina and its somewhat unexpected sister taxon, the burrow-wall commensal Divariscintilla octotentaculata. This latter result suggests that a habitat shift from host burrow wall to host body surface occurred while retaining the same host species and led to the loss of the specialized hanging foot structure. Our findings suggest that ostensibly modest within-host ecological shifts can lead to major morphological changes in these clams.
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0024-4066
EI 1095-8312
PD JUL
PY 2018
VL 124
IS 3
BP 504
EP 517
DI 10.1093/biolinnean/bly044
SC Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000442934800016
ER

PT J
AU Djeghri, N
   Atkinson, A
   Fileman, ES
   Harmer, RA
   Widdicombe, CE
   McEvoy, AJ
   Cornwell, L
   Mayor, DJ
AF Djeghri, Nicolas
   Atkinson, Angus
   Fileman, Elaine S.
   Harmer, Rachel A.
   Widdicombe, Claire E.
   McEvoy, Andrea J.
   Cornwell, Louise
   Mayor, Daniel J.
TI High prey-predator size ratios and unselective feeding in copepods: A
   seasonal comparison of five species with contrasting feeding modes
SO PROGRESS IN OCEANOGRAPHY
DT Article
DE Copepod; Zooplankton biomass; Feeding; Selectivity; Intraguild
   predation; Predator-prey size ratio; Western Channel Observatory; Sloppy
   feeding
ID WESTERN ENGLISH-CHANNEL; CENTROPAGES-TYPICUS KROYER; MARINE PLANKTONIC
   COPEPOD; OITHONA-SIMILIS; CALANUS-FINMARCHICUS; ECOLOGICAL RESEARCH;
   FOOD SELECTIVITY; ACARTIA-CLAUSI; NORTH-ATLANTIC; EGG-PRODUCTION
AB There has been an upsurge of interest in trait-based approaches to zooplankton, modelling the seasonal changes in the feeding modes of zooplankton in relation to phytoplankton traits such as size or motility. We examined this link at two English Channel plankton monitoring sites south of Plymouth (L4 and El). At L4 there was a general transition from diatoms in spring to motile microplankton in summer and autumn, but this was not mirrored in the succession of copepod feeding traits; for example the ambushing Oithona similis dominated during the spring diatom bloom. At nearby El we measured seasonality of food and grazers, finding strong variation between 2014 and 2015 but overall low mesozooplankton biomass (median 4.5 mg C m(-3)). We also made a seasonal grazing study of five copepods with contrasting feeding modes (Calculus helgolandicus, Centropages typicus, Acartia clausi, Pseudocalanus elongatus and Oithona similis), counting the larger prey items from the natural seston. All species of copepod fed on all food types and differences between their diets were only subtle; the overriding driver of diet was the composition of the prey field. Even the smaller copepods fed on copepod nauplii at significant rates, supporting previous suggestions of the importance of intra-guild predation. All copepods, including O. similis, were capable of tackling extremely long ( > 500 mu m) diatom chains at clearance rates comparable to those on ciliates. Maximum observed prey:predator length ratios ranged from 0.12 (C. helgolandicus) up to 0.52 (O. similis). Unselective feeding behaviour and the ability to remove highly elongated cells have implications for how copepod feeding is represented in ecological and biogeochemical models.
OI Fileman, Elaine/0000-0002-7795-7535
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0079-6611
PD JUL-AUG
PY 2018
VL 165
BP 63
EP 74
DI 10.1016/j.pocean.2018.04.013
SC Oceanography
UT WOS:000441489600006
ER

PT J
AU Miller, JA
   Gillman, R
   Carlton, JT
   Murray, CC
   Nelson, JC
   Otani, M
   Ruiz, GM
AF Miller, Jessica A.
   Gillman, Reva
   Carlton, James T.
   Murray, Cathryn Clarke
   Nelson, Jocelyn C.
   Otani, Michio
   Ruiz, Gregory M.
TI Trait-based characterization of species transported on Japanese tsunami
   marine debris: Effect of prior invasion history on trait distribution
SO MARINE POLLUTION BULLETIN
DT Article
DE North America; Hawaiian Archipelago; Coastal species; Multivariate trait
   space
ID PLASTIC DEBRIS; SUCCESSFUL INVADERS; NORTH-AMERICA; LIFE-HISTORY;
   METAANALYSIS; COMMUNITIES; HITCHHIKING; MANAGEMENT; DISPERSAL; COASTAL
AB Nearly 300 coastal marine species collected from > 630 debris items from the 2011 Great East Japan earthquake and tsunami have landed alive along the North American Pacific coast and the Hawaiian Archipelago. We synthesized life history, environmental, and distributional traits for 103 of these species and compared species with (n = 30) and without (n = 62) known invasion histories. The species represent 12 phyla, and Mollusca, Crustacea, and Bryozoa accounted for 71 of the 103 species. The majority are native to the Northwest Pacific and the Central Indo-Pacific. Species with known invasion history were more common on artificial and hardpan substrates, in temperate reef, fouling, and flotsam habitats, at subtropical and tropical temperatures, and exhibited greater salinity tolerance than species with no prior invasion history. Thirty-five Japanese tsunami marine species without prior invasion history overlapped in ordination trait space with known invaders, indicating a subset of species in this novel assemblage that possess traits similar to species with known invasion history.
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0025-326X
EI 1879-3363
PD JUL
PY 2018
VL 132
SI SI
BP 90
EP 101
DI 10.1016/j.marpolbul.2017.12.064
PN C
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000440117100011
PM 29336824
ER

PT J
AU Joydas, TV
   Qurban, MA
   Ali, SM
   Albarau, JF
   Rabaoui, L
   Manikandan, KP
   Ashraf, M
   Papadopoulos, VP
   Giacobbe, S
   Krishnakumar, PK
AF Joydas, Thadickal V.
   Qurban, Mohammad A.
   Ali, Said M.
   Albarau, Joselito F.
   Rabaoui, Lotfi
   Manikandan, Karuppasamy P.
   Ashraf, Mohamed
   Papadopoulos, Vassilis P.
   Giacobbe, Salvatore
   Krishnakumar, Periyadan K.
TI Macrobenthic community structure in the deep waters of the Red Sea
SO DEEP-SEA RESEARCH PART I-OCEANOGRAPHIC RESEARCH PAPERS
DT Article
DE Deep-sea benthos; Oligotrophic; Diversity; Standing stock; Red Sea;
   Saudi Arabia
ID OXYGEN MINIMUM ZONE; NW ARABIAN SEA; CONTINENTAL-MARGIN;
   SPECIES-DIVERSITY; STANDING STOCK; NE ATLANTIC; COLD SEEP; PATTERNS;
   BIODIVERSITY; OCEAN
AB Even though the Red Sea is characterized by unique oceanographic conditions, only few studies have addressed the ecology of its deep-sea benthos. This work discusses some traits of the Saudi deep waters of the Red Sea between 23 degrees N and 28 degrees N. Macrobenthic samples were collected using a box corer (0.1 m(2) surface area) from 59 stations at depths ranging between 220 m and 1678 m. The stations were categorized into four depth zones (<= 500 m, 501-750 m, 751-1000 m and > 1000 m) and two latitudinal areas (northern and central) for data analysis. A total of 186 species have been identified including polychaetes (135), crustaceans (27), molluscs (18), echinoderms (3), echiuroid (1), sipunculoid (1), and oligochaete (1). While 114 species were present in only 1-3 stations, only 30 species were found to be widely distributed, being recorded in all depth zones from northern and central areas. The trophic structure analysis indicated high functional diversity with the presence of seven feeding levels represented mainly by surface deposit feeders, facultative detritivores, and benthic carnivores. In general, the density and biomass of the deep sea macrobenthic community studied herein are lower than those reported in other seas with similar depth zones. This is most likely due to the particular environmental factors of the Red Sea, represented mainly by its oligotrophic nature, high temperature, high salinity, and low food availability in the form of organic matter. It is worth noting that some ecological parameters considered showed a general decreasing pattern (density: 10-1666 ind. m(-2); biomass: 0.02-10.98 gm(-2); species richness S: 1-59; Shannon-Wiener diversity index H': 0 - 5.1) in relation with the increasing depth in northern and central areas. The bathymetric trends of the macrobenthic communities were also demonstrated with findings of multivariate analyses. The distribution of benthic communities at all depth zones appeared to be controlled by the availability of organic matter and abiotic factors such as temperature and salinity. Pronounced latitudinal and longitudinal trends in the macrobenthic communities are not evident, most likely due to the limited latitudinal and longitudinal variation of the sampling stations of this study. No spatial variations were found with the feeding types, species evenness index, and species dominance index. Considering the scarcity of published data on the deep benthic community from the Red Sea, this study provides some useful baseline information on this topic and contributes to decrease the knowledge gap on the diversity of macrobenthic communities in this region.
OI Rabaoui, Lotfi/0000-0003-2068-692X; Joydas, T.V./0000-0002-6725-4094
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0967-0637
EI 1879-0119
PD JUL
PY 2018
VL 137
BP 38
EP 56
DI 10.1016/j.dsr.2018.05.004
SC Oceanography
UT WOS:000438003300005
ER

PT J
AU Keck, F
   Franc, A
   Kahlert, M
AF Keck, Francois
   Franc, Alain
   Kahlert, Maria
TI Disentangling the processes driving the biogeography of freshwater
   diatoms: A multiscale approach
SO JOURNAL OF BIOGEOGRAPHY
DT Article
DE biogeography; diatoms; dispersal limitation; environmental response;
   mass effect; multiscale; multivariate spatial analysis; traits
ID METACOMMUNITY STRUCTURE; COMMUNITY STRUCTURE; COMPREHENSIVE FRAMEWORK;
   FUNCTIONAL TRAITS; AQUATIC ORGANISMS; BENTHIC DIATOMS; BOREAL STREAMS;
   SPECIES DATA; DISPERSAL; PATTERNS
AB Aim1. To disentangle the effects of local environmental conditions and space at multiple scales in order to uncover and explain biogeographical signals in microbial communities of freshwater diatoms. 2. To assess the role of species traits related to dispersal capacities in diatom biogeography.
   Location Rivers and streams of Sweden sampled over a total area of 450,000km(2).
   MethodsWe used partial redundancy analyses and variation partitioning coupled with spatial eigenfunctions analyses to separate the effects of environment and space at three different scales on diatoms community structure. As community analyses might give limited insight into species-specific mechanisms, we also performed species by species variation partitioning and the amount of variance explained by each fraction was related to species cell length and attachment to the substrate.
   Results We found a strong effect of environment and space at a large scale suggesting environmental filtering and dispersal limitation over large distances. Additionally, species-based analyses uncovered an effect of space at fine scale suggesting possible species-specific mass effect dynamic or species sorting driven by missing environmental factors varying at fine scale. Environmental and spatial effects varied strongly among species, but this variation was not explained by cell length and attachment to the substrate.
   Main conclusions Our results confirm the importance of both environment and dispersal-related processes in controlling diatom community structure and bring new perspectives on the role of dispersal in shaping microbial communities at biogeographical scale. Dispersal being a species-specific mechanism, species associations are not necessarily conserved from site to site and species-based approaches can detect different spatial patterns than those derived from traditional community analyses. Contrary to the conclusions of small-scale analysis of connected metacommunities, interspecific trait variation seems to be of limited importance for long-distance overland dispersal in diatoms.
OI Keck, Francois/0000-0002-3323-4167; Kahlert, Maria/0000-0001-9643-4281
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0305-0270
EI 1365-2699
PD JUL
PY 2018
VL 45
IS 7
BP 1582
EP 1592
DI 10.1111/jbi.13239
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Physical Geography
UT WOS:000437836600012
ER

PT J
AU Richardson, LE
   Graham, NAJ
   Pratchett, MS
   Eurich, JG
   Hoey, AS
AF Richardson, Laura E.
   Graham, Nicholas A. J.
   Pratchett, Morgan S.
   Eurich, Jacob G.
   Hoey, Andrew S.
TI Mass coral bleaching causes biotic homogenization of reef fish
   assemblages
SO GLOBAL CHANGE BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE assemblage structure; beta diversity; climate change; coral reefs; coral
   species composition; functional redundancy; scales; traits
ID GREAT-BARRIER-REEF; FUNCTIONAL HOMOGENIZATION; TAXONOMIC HOMOGENIZATION;
   EXTINCTION VULNERABILITY; STRUCTURAL COMPLEXITY; OCEAN ACIDIFICATION;
   RESPONSE DIVERSITY; BIODIVERSITY LOSS; DISTURBANCES; ANTHROPOCENE
AB Global climate change is altering community composition across many ecosystems due to nonrandom species turnover, typically characterized by the loss of specialist species and increasing similarity of biological communities across spatial scales. As anthropogenic disturbances continue to alter species composition globally, there is a growing need to identify how species responses influence the establishment of distinct assemblages, such that management actions may be appropriately assigned. Here, we use trait-based analyses to compare temporal changes in five complementary indices of reef fish assemblage structure among six taxonomically distinct coral reef habitats exposed to a system-wide thermal stress event. Our results revealed increased taxonomic and functional similarity of previously distinct reef fish assemblages following mass coral bleaching, with changes characterized by subtle, but significant, shifts toward predominance of small-bodied, algal-farming habitat generalists. Furthermore, while the taxonomic or functional richness of fish assemblages did not change across all habitats, an increase in functional originality indicated an overall loss of functional redundancy. We also found that prebleaching coral composition better predicted changes in fish assemblage structure than the magnitude of coral loss. These results emphasize how measures of alpha diversity can mask important changes in the structure and functioning of ecosystems as assemblages reorganize. Our findings also highlight the role of coral species composition in structuring communities and influencing the diversity of responses of reef fishes to disturbance. As new coral species configurations emerge, their desirability will hinge upon the composition of associated species and their capacity to maintain key ecological processes in spite of ongoing disturbances.
RI Graham, Nicholas/C-8360-2014
OI Graham, Nicholas/0000-0002-0304-7467; Pratchett,
   Morgan/0000-0002-1862-8459; Eurich, Jacob/0000-0003-1764-7524; Hoey,
   Andrew/0000-0002-4261-5594
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 1354-1013
EI 1365-2486
PD JUL
PY 2018
VL 24
IS 7
BP 3117
EP 3129
DI 10.1111/gcb.14119
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000437281500031
PM 29633512
ER

PT J
AU Xu, G
   Yang, E
   Lee, Y
   Kang, SH
AF Xu, Guangjian
   Yang, EunJin
   Lee, Youngju
   Kang, Sung-Ho
TI Vertical shift in ciliate body-size spectrum and its environmental
   drivers in western Arctic pelagic ecosystems
SO ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE AND POLLUTION RESEARCH
DT Article
DE Body-size spectrum; Pelagic ciliate; Bioassessment; Vertical shift;
   Arctic Ocean
ID TROPHIC-FUNCTIONAL STRUCTURE; BIOFILM-DWELLING PROTOZOA; WATER-QUALITY
   STATUS; COASTAL WATERS; PROTIST COMMUNITIES; NORTHERN CHINA; JIAOZHOU
   BAY; COLONIZATION DYNAMICS; MARINE BIOASSESSMENT; SOUTHERN-OCEAN
AB As an inherent functional trait, body-size spectrum is widely used as an informative indicator to summarize community structures in taxon-free space. The vertical shift in the body-size spectrum of pelagic ciliates and its environmental drivers were explored at eight depth layers from the water surface to a depth of 100 m in western Arctic pelagic ecosystems. A total of 85 samples were collected at 23 sampling stations during the summer sea-ice reduction period from August 5 to August 24, 2016. Based on equivalent spherical diameter (ESD), six body-size ranks were identified, of which ranks S2 (15-25 mu m), S3 (26-38 mu m), S4 (39-60 mu m), and S6 (79-91 mu m) were the top four levels in frequency of occurrence and ranks S2 and S3 were the dominant levels in abundance. The body-size spectrum of the ciliates showed a clear vertical shift, with a significant succession among the dominant body-size units from the water surface to deeper layers in the water column. Multivariate analysis demonstrated a significant vertical variation in the body-size spectrum of the ciliates among the eight depths, which was significantly correlated with nutrients (phosphate and nitrite + nitrate) and chlorophyll a (Chl a), alone or in combination with dissolved oxygen. Four body-size diversity/distinctness indices were significantly correlated with the levels of phosphate, nitrite + nitrate, ammonium, and Chl a. Our results demonstrated that the body-size spectrum of pelagic ciliates can be shifted by environmental drivers (mainly nutrients and Chl a); thus, we suggest that it may be used to indicate water quality status on a vertical scale in the water column in deep seas.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0944-1344
EI 1614-7499
PD JUL
PY 2018
VL 25
IS 19
BP 19082
EP 19091
DI 10.1007/s11356-018-2094-z
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000437264700077
PM 29721799
ER

PT J
AU Kelley, JL
   Grierson, PF
   Collin, SP
   Davies, PM
AF Kelley, Jennifer L.
   Grierson, Pauline F.
   Collin, Shaun P.
   Davies, Peter M.
TI Habitat disruption and the identification and management of functional
   trait changes
SO FISH AND FISHERIES
DT Article
DE climate change; contemporary evolution; environmental stress;
   human-impacts; phenotypic plasticity
ID FRESH-WATER FISH; LATERAL-LINE MORPHOLOGY; CLIMATE-CHANGE; PHENOTYPIC
   PLASTICITY; ENVIRONMENTAL-CHANGE; OCEAN ACIDIFICATION; BODY-SIZE;
   ECOLOGICAL CONSEQUENCES; THREESPINE STICKLEBACK; POECILIA-RETICULATA
AB Aquatic ecosystems are facing escalating threats from urbanization, habitat loss and projected impacts of climate change, which both individually and in combination have the potential to fundamentally alter ecosystem functioning. While it is well established that habitat disturbances can affect the composition and diversity of aquatic communities, only recently have studies considered whether such impacts result in changes in species' functional traits. We consider how functional traits of freshwater and marine fishes respond to environmental change, and how shifts in the expression of these traits can impact community dynamics and key ecological processes, including trophic interactions and nutrient transfer. We find that a multitude of functional traits, including behavioural and sensory traits, is sensitive to habitat disturbances. We demonstrate how these trait changes can be used to reveal hidden ecological diversity as well as serving as early indicators of environmental perturbation. We conclude that management strategies that consider the fundamental biological responses of fishes to habitat disturbance will be particularly effective in determining causal relationships within the ecological network. While detailed information on trait function is often lacking, even some general understanding of trait function and importance will facilitate targeted and efficient ecosystem management. We urge fisheries biologists and aquatic ecosystem managers to consider the role of functional traits in facilitating effective habitat restoration and management.
OI Grierson, Pauline/0000-0003-2135-0272; Kelley,
   Jennifer/0000-0002-8223-7241
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 1467-2960
EI 1467-2979
PD JUL
PY 2018
VL 19
IS 4
BP 716
EP 728
DI 10.1111/faf.12284
SC Fisheries
UT WOS:000437113100009
ER

PT J
AU Ortiz-Alvarez, R
   Fierer, N
   de los Rios, A
   Casamayor, EO
   Barberan, A
AF Ortiz-Alvarez, Rudiger
   Fierer, Noah
   de los Rios, Asuncion
   Casamayor, Emilio O.
   Barberan, Albert
TI Consistent changes in the taxonomic structure and functional attributes
   of bacterial communities during primary succession
SO ISME JOURNAL
DT Article
ID SOIL MICROBIAL COMMUNITIES; OPERON COPY NUMBER; PHOSPHORUS AVAILABILITY;
   INFANT GUT; DIVERSITY; ECOLOGY; TRAITS; MECHANISMS; PATTERNS; NUTRIENT
AB Ecologists have long studied primary succession, the changes that occur in biological communities after initial colonization of an environment. Most of this work has focused on succession in plant communities, laying the conceptual foundation for much of what we currently know about community assembly patterns over time. Because of their prevalence and importance in ecosystems, an increasing number of studies have focused on microbial community dynamics during succession. Here, we conducted a meta-analysis of bacterial primary succession patterns across a range of distinct habitats, including the infant gut, plant surfaces, soil chronosequences, and aquatic environments, to determine whether consistent changes in bacterial diversity, community composition, and functional traits are evident over the course of succession. Although these distinct habitats harbor unique bacterial communities, we were able to identify patterns in community assembly that were shared across habitat types. We found an increase in taxonomic and functional diversity with time while the taxonomic composition and functional profiles of communities became less variable (lower beta diversity) in late successional stages. In addition, we found consistent decreases in the rRNA operon copy number and in the high-efficient phosphate assimilation process (Pst system) suggesting that reductions in resource availability during succession select for taxa adapted to low-resource conditions. Together, these results highlight that, like many plant communities, microbial communities also exhibit predictable patterns during primary succession.
RI de los Rios, Asuncion/L-3694-2014; Casamayor, Emilio/A-3676-2010
OI de los Rios, Asuncion/0000-0002-0266-3516; Casamayor,
   Emilio/0000-0001-7074-3318; Ortiz-Alvarez, Rudiger/0000-0002-8553-5420
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 1751-7362
EI 1751-7370
PD JUL
PY 2018
VL 12
IS 7
BP 1658
EP 1667
DI 10.1038/s41396-018-0076-2
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Microbiology
UT WOS:000436623600003
PM 29463893
ER

PT J
AU Aidar, FJ
   Jaco de Oliveira, R
   Gama de Matos, D
   Chilibeck, PD
   de Souza, RF
   Carneiro, AL
   Machado Reis, V
AF Aidar, Felipe J.
   Jaco de Oliveira, Ricardo
   Gama de Matos, Dihogo
   Chilibeck, Philip D.
   de Souza, Raphael F.
   Carneiro, Andre L.
   Machado Reis, Victor
TI A randomized trial of the effects of an aquatic exercise program on
   depression, anxiety levels, and functional capacity of people who
   suffered an ischemic stroke
SO JOURNAL OF SPORTS MEDICINE AND PHYSICAL FITNESS
DT Article
DE Stroke; Exercise; Rehabilitation
ID QUALITY-OF-LIFE; PHYSICAL-ACTIVITY; OLDER-ADULTS; REHABILITATION;
   ASSOCIATION; INVENTORY; BALANCE; SCALE
AB BACKGROUND: Aquatic exercise programs are used in rehabilitation and might help to reduce disability after stroke. This was a randomized intervention trial to assess the influence of an aquatic exercise program on people suffering from depression and anxiety after ischemic stroke.
   METHODS: Participants were randomized to an experimental group (EG) composed of 19 individuals (51.8 +/- 8.5 years; ten males and nine females), and a control group (CG) composed of 17 people (52.7 +/- 6.7 years; nine males and eight females). The aquatic exercise program consisted of two sessions per week, each lasting between 45 and 60 minutes and divided into 5 to 10 minutes exercise sections during 12 weeks. The State-Trait Anxiety Inventory was used to determine anxiety levels while the Beck Depression Inventory was used as a self-assessment of depression.
   RESULTS: EG improved measures of depression, anxiety trait and anxiety state between pre- and post-treatment, with no changes in CG. EG improved in all tests related to functional capacity compared to CG.
   CONCLUSIONS: The practice of aquatic exercises promotes improvements in the levels of depression and anxiety in people who suffered an ischemic stroke.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0022-4707
EI 1827-1928
PD JUL-AUG
PY 2018
VL 58
IS 7-8
BP 1171
EP 1177
DI 10.23736/S0022-4707.17.07284-X
SC Sport Sciences
UT WOS:000437195000028
PM 28488825
ER

PT J
AU Venter, PC
   Nitsche, F
   Arndt, H
AF Venter, Paul Christiaan
   Nitsche, Frank
   Arndt, Hartmut
TI The Hidden Diversity of Flagellated Protists in Soil
SO PROTIST
DT Article
DE Heterotrophic flagellates; choanoflagellate; bicosoecids; cercomonads;
   apusozoans; high-throughput sequencing
ID OPERATIONAL TAXONOMIC UNITS; HIGHLY DIVERSE; CHOANOFLAGELLATE;
   PHYLOGENY; COMMUNITIES; WATER; BIOGEOGRAPHY; EUKARYOTES; EVOLUTION;
   ECOLOGY
AB Protists are among the most diverse and abundant eukaryotes in soil. However, gaps between described and sequenced protist morphospecies still present a pending problem when surveying environmental samples for known species using molecular methods. The number of sequences in the molecular PR2 database (similar to 130,000) is limited compared to the species richness expected (>1 million protist species) limiting the recovery rate. This is important, since high throughput sequencing (HTS) methods are used to find associative patterns between functional traits, taxa and environmental parameters. We performed HTS to survey soil flagellates in 150 grasslands of central Europe, and tested the recovery rate of ten previously isolated and cultivated cercomonad species, among locally found diversity. We recovered sequences for reference soil flagellate species, but also a great number of their phylogenetically evaluated genetic variants, among rare and dominant taxa with presumably own biogeography. This was recorded among dominant (cercozoans, Sandona), rare (apusozoans) and a large hidden diversity of predominantly aquatic protists in soil (choanoflagellates, bicosoecids) often forming novel clades associated with uncultured environmental sequences. Evaluating the reads, instead of the OTUs that individual reads are usually clustered into, we discovered that much of this hidden diversity may be lost due to clustering. (C) 2018 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1434-4610
PD JUL
PY 2018
VL 169
IS 3
BP 432
EP 449
DI 10.1016/j.protis.2018.04.007
SC Microbiology
UT WOS:000436786500007
PM 29870898
ER

PT J
AU Frances, DN
   McCauley, SJ
AF Frances, Dachin N.
   McCauley, Shannon J.
TI Warming drives higher rates of prey consumption and increases rates of
   intraguild predation
SO OECOLOGIA
DT Article
DE Behavior; Climate change; Foraging; Intraguild predation; Odonata
ID FOOD-WEB STRUCTURE; CLIMATE-CHANGE; TEMPERATURE-DEPENDENCE; ODONATE
   LARVAE; INTERACTION STRENGTH; FUNCTIONAL-RESPONSE; THERMAL TOLERANCE;
   DRAGONFLY LARVAE; SIZE STRUCTURE; LIFE-HISTORY
AB Warming due to climate change is expected to alter species interactions. These interactions are shaped by components of individual behavior, particularly foraging behaviors. However, few studies consider species' behavioral responses to warming to predict how species interactions will be affected by warming. We chose two complementary approaches to examine how climate warming may affect the behavior and interactions of aquatic intraguild predators. First, we measured behavioral responses to warming in six larval dragonfly species, expecting that feeding rate and activity would increase with temperature. Secondly, we conducted intraguild predation (IGP) trials with three species to understand how temperature affects IGP, and if species' behavioral responses to warming are indicative of the outcome of IGP interactions. Warming increased feeding rates by 42% on average across species but had no effect on activity rate. The magnitude of change in feeding rate was positively correlated with the maximum temperatures species experience across their ranges. Lastly, warming increased rates of IGP twofold, however, species' behavioral responses alone were not predictive of their susceptibility to become IG prey of other larvae at warmer temperatures. Our results provide evidence that IGP interactions may be greatly affected by future increases in temperature; however, activity responses to warming alone are weak predictors of the outcomes of these interactions. Future studies should consider other species' traits when forecasting the effects of climate change on species interactions.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0029-8549
EI 1432-1939
PD JUL
PY 2018
VL 187
IS 3
BP 585
EP 596
DI 10.1007/s00442-018-4146-y
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000436242000002
PM 29687229
ER

PT J
AU La Sorte, FA
   Lepczyk, CA
   Aronson, MFJ
   Goddard, MA
   Hedblom, M
   Katti, M
   MacGregor-Fors, I
   Mortberg, U
   Nilon, CH
   Warren, PS
   Williams, NSG
   Yang, J
AF La Sorte, Frank A.
   Lepczyk, Christopher A.
   Aronson, Myla F. J.
   Goddard, Mark A.
   Hedblom, Marcus
   Katti, Madhusudan
   MacGregor-Fors, Ian
   Mortberg, Ulla
   Nilon, Charles H.
   Warren, Paige S.
   Williams, Nicholas S. G.
   Yang, Jun
TI The phylogenetic and functional diversity of regional breeding bird
   assemblages is reduced and constricted through urbanization
SO DIVERSITY AND DISTRIBUTIONS
DT Article
DE breeding bird assemblages; evolutionary distinctiveness; functional
   diversity; phylogenetic diversity; traits; urbanization
ID SPECIES RICHNESS; AVIAN DIVERSITY; CITIES; CONSERVATION; BIODIVERSITY;
   COMMUNITIES; SPACE; TRAITS; TIME; HOMOGENIZATION
AB Aim: Urbanization broadly affects the phylogenetic and functional diversity of natural communities through a variety of processes including habitat loss and the introduction of non-native species. Due to the challenge of acquiring direct measurements, these effects have been studied primarily using space-for-time substitution where spatial urbanization gradients are used to infer the consequences of urbanization occurring across time. The ability of alternative sampling designs to replicate the findings derived using space-for-time substitution has not been tested.
   Location: Global.
   Methods: We contrasted the phylogenetic and functional diversity of breeding bird assemblages in 58 cities worldwide with the corresponding regional breeding bird assemblages estimated using geographic range maps.
   Results: Compared to regional assemblages, urban assemblages contained lower phylogenetic diversity, lower phylogenetic beta diversity, a reduction in the least evolutionary distinct species and the loss of the most evolutionarily distinct species. We found no evidence that these effects were related to the presence of non-native species. Urban assemblages contained fewer aquatic species and fewer aquatic foraging species. The distribution of body size and range size narrowed for urban assemblages with the loss of species at both tails of the distribution, especially large bodied and broadly distributed species. Urban assemblages contained a greater proportion of species classified as passerines, doves or pigeons; species identified as granivores; species that forage within vegetation or in the air; and species with more generalized associations with foraging strata.
   Main conclusions: Urbanization is associated with the overall reduction and constriction of phylogenetic and functional diversity, results that largely replicate those generated using space-for-time substitution, increasing our confidence in the quality of the combined inferences. When direct measurements are unavailable, our findings emphasize the value of developing independent sampling methods that broaden and reinforce our understanding of the ecological implications of urbanization.
RI Mortberg, Ulla/I-6527-2012; MacGregor-Fors, Ian/P-1455-2014; Goddard,
   Mark/D-1166-2010
OI Mortberg, Ulla/0000-0002-1640-8946; MacGregor-Fors,
   Ian/0000-0003-3198-7322; Goddard, Mark/0000-0002-2283-6752
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 1366-9516
EI 1472-4642
PD JUL
PY 2018
VL 24
IS 7
BP 928
EP 938
DI 10.1111/ddi.12738
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000435934800006
ER

PT J
AU Jenouvrier, S
   Desprez, M
   Fay, R
   Barbraud, C
   Weimerskirch, H
   Delord, K
   Caswell, H
AF Jenouvrier, Stephanie
   Desprez, Marine
   Fay, Remi
   Barbraud, Christophe
   Weimerskirch, Henri
   Delord, Karine
   Caswell, Hal
TI Climate change and functional traits affect population dynamics of a
   long-lived seabird
SO JOURNAL OF ANIMAL ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE birds; climate change; foraging behaviours; non-breeding season;
   phenotypic traits; pre-breeding season; timing of breeding; wing length
ID PETREL PAGODROMA-NIVEA; BLACK-BROWED ALBATROSS; LIFE-HISTORY TRAITS;
   SOUTHERN-OCEAN; TOP-PREDATOR; BREEDING PERFORMANCE; PHENOTYPIC CHANGE;
   TROPHIC MISMATCH; COHORT VARIATION; MARINE PREDATOR
AB 1. Recent studies unravelled the effect of climate changes on populations through their impact on functional traits and demographic rates in terrestrial and freshwater ecosystems, but such understanding in marine ecosystems remains incomplete.
   2. Here, we evaluate the impact of the combined effects of climate and functional traits on population dynamics of a long-lived migratory seabird breeding in the southern ocean: the black-browed albatross (Thalassarche melanophris, BBA). We address the following prospective question: Of all the changes in the climate and functional traits, which would produce the biggest impact on the BBA population growth rate?
   3. We develop a structured matrix population model that includes the effect of climate and functional traits on the complete BBA life cycle. A detailed sensitivity analysis is conducted to understand the main pathway by which climate and functional trait changes affect the population growth rate.
   4. The population growth rate of BBA is driven by the combined effects of climate over various seasons and multiple functional traits with carry-over effects across seasons on demographic processes. Changes in sea surface temperature (SST) during late winter cause the biggest changes in the population growth rate, through their effect on juvenile survival. Adults appeared to respond to changes in winter climate conditions by adapting their migratory schedule rather than by modifying their at-sea foraging activity. However, the sensitivity of the population growth rate to SST affecting BBA migratory schedule is small. BBA foraging activity during the pre-breeding period has the biggest impact on population growth rate among functional traits. Finally, changes in SST during the breeding season have little effect on the population growth rate.
   5. These results highlight the importance of early life histories and carry-over effects of climate and functional traits on demographic rates across multiple seasons in population response to climate change. Robust conclusions about the roles of various phases of the life cycle and functional traits in population response to climate change rely on an understanding of the relationships of traits to demographic rates across the complete life cycle.
OI jenouvrier, stephanie/0000-0003-3324-2383
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 0021-8790
EI 1365-2656
PD JUL
PY 2018
VL 87
IS 4
SI SI
BP 906
EP 920
DI 10.1111/1365-2656.12827
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Zoology
UT WOS:000435940700003
PM 29931768
ER

PT J
AU Barbosa, C
   Pugnaire, FI
   Peroni, N
   Castellani, TT
AF Barbosa, Cristiana
   Pugnaire, Francisco I.
   Peroni, Nivaldo
   Castellani, Tania Tarabini
TI Warming effects on the colonization of a coastal ecosystem by Furcraea
   foetida (Asparagaceae), a clonal invasive species
SO PLANT ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE Atmospheric warming; CAM species; Climate change; Facilitation;
   Invasions; Open-top chamber
ID CHLOROPHYLL FLUORESCENCE; SUBTROPICAL LAKE; CLIMATE-CHANGE; PLANT;
   TEMPERATURE; CAM; EVOLUTION; AGAVACEAE; ORIGINS; GROWTH
AB Global warming is expected to cause significant changes in the distribution of species worldwide, altering ecosystem function and services. These impacts can be exacerbated by synergism with other global change drivers, such as biological invasions. Furcraea foetida (Asparagaceae) is a CAM species native to Central America and northern South America that is currently invading coastal ecosystems in the Atlantic Forest biome in Brazil. The species propagates clonally by bulbils, forming dense clusters that exclude native species. We addressed whether warming may favor or impair development of F. foetida bulbils based on functional traits and assessed whether plant cover of native species influenced F. foetida establishment in a rocky shore ecosystem. We used open-top chambers during summer and autumn, which increased air temperature during daylight hours by 0.4 A degrees C relative to ambient conditions. This short-term warming effect increased the leaf length of bulbils but had no effect on number of leaves, dry mass, specific leaf area, leaf dry matter content (LDMC), or photosynthetic efficiency of photosystem II (Fv/Fm). However, an increase in vegetation cover decreased LDMC and helped maintain high Fv/Fm, having an indirect positive effect on F. foetida establishment that suggests a facilitation interaction in this extreme environment. Even though the manipulated temperature did not reach IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change) forecasts for 2100, our data show that even small, short-term changes in temperature affected plant performance. Thus, we suggest that F. foetida may be favored in a scenario of climate change, increasing its negative effects on biodiversity of coastal ecosystems.
OI Peroni, Nivaldo/0000-0002-6770-5377; Pugnaire, Francisco
   I./0000-0002-1227-6827
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1385-0237
EI 1573-5052
PD JUL
PY 2018
VL 219
IS 7
BP 813
EP 821
DI 10.1007/s11258-018-0836-0
SC Plant Sciences; Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Forestry
UT WOS:000434910100005
ER

PT J
AU Hille, S
   Andersen, DK
   Kronvang, B
   Baattrup-Pedersen, A
AF Hille, Sandra
   Andersen, Dagmar Kappel
   Kronvang, Brian
   Baattrup-Pedersen, Annette
TI Structural and functional characteristics of buffer strip vegetation in
   an agricultural landscape - high potential for nutrient removal but low
   potential for plant biodiversity
SO SCIENCE OF THE TOTAL ENVIRONMENT
DT Article
DE Riparian buffer strips; diversity; productivity; plant traits;
   management
ID ELLENBERG INDICATOR VALUES; RIPARIAN ZONES; PHOSPHORUS RETENTION;
   ECOSYSTEM SERVICES; SPECIES RICHNESS; STREAM; MANAGEMENT; GRASSLAND;
   NITROGEN; EUTROPHICATION
AB Vegetated buffer strips constitute a transition zone between terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems and provide several ecosystem services. Buffer strips are often applied as a mitigation measure against diffuse pollution in agricultural areas, primarily because they may retain nutrients and in this way help protect the aquatic environment. Additionally, they can improve biodiversity in an otherwise homogenous landscape and may therefore have a value in their own right. In the present study, we characterized the structural and functional features of the vegetation in Danish buffer strips using a nationwide dataset to explore: i) their floristic quality in terms of species diversity and conservation value and ii) based on their functional characteristics, their potential to retain nutrients. Moreover, we analyzed how the structural and functional characteristics varied along gradients in the environmental features of the catchment. We found that the floristic quality of the buffer vegetation was generally low, exhibiting an average of only 3.3% of the number of species of conservation interest. Instead, Danish buffer strips were dominated by widespread and productive species that are tolerant of anthropogenic impacts in the catchment. The abundance of highly productive plant species was positively related to high intensity land use, whereas the abundance of stress-tolerant plant species was positively related to low intensity land use. The high productivity of the buffer strips implies a large bio-storage potential, and these areas might therefore offer an opportunity to remove nutrients by harvesting the plant biomass. We discuss how Danish buffer strips could be exploited via appropriate management (e.g. harvesting) to maximize nutrient retention and at the same time improve floristic quality. (C) 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 0048-9697
EI 1879-1026
PD JUL 1
PY 2018
VL 628-629
BP 805
EP 814
DI 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.02.117
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000432462000083
PM 29455130
ER

PT J
AU Salinas, MJ
   Cases, JJ
   Rubio-Rios, J
   Lopez-Carrique, E
   Ramos-Miras, JJ
   Gil, C
AF Salinas, Maria J.
   Jesus Cases, J.
   Rubio-Rios, Juan
   Lopez-Carrique, Enrique
   Ramos-Miras, Jose J.
   Gil, Carlos
TI Climate-driven changes of riparian plant functional types in permanent
   headwater streams. Implications for stream food webs
SO PLOS ONE
DT Article
ID LITTER DECOMPOSITION RATES; LEAF ECONOMICS SPECTRUM;
   PHRAGMITES-AUSTRALIS; SPECIES RICHNESS; SOIL-SALINITY; TRAITS;
   ECOSYSTEMS; VEGETATION; WORLDWIDE; ECOLOGY
AB Little is known regarding consequences of climate change on riparian plant functional types (PFTs) related to leaf traits, with putative domino effects on stream food webs, plausible even if the tipping point of stream-desiccation is not reached. We hypothesized that, as stream food-webs are highly dependent on riparian subsidies, climate change might alter PFTs to the point of weakening terrestrial-aquatic linkages. We conducted a gradient analysis to assess the relative effects of climate, soil and riparian physical characteristics on PFTs. If PFTs differ significantly in leaf traits and climate had major influences on them, we could assume space-for-time interchangeability forward in time to predict leaf traits changes, and consequences for stream food webs under future climate change scenarios. Results indicated a clear distinction in leaf traits among PFTs: woody deciduous plants showed leaf traits associated to high decomposability and nutritional value for invertebrate shredders compared to evergreen woody and giant graminoid groups. We found a prime role of climate predicting changes in abundance and diversity of PFTs: 1) a warming and precipitation-decline scenario, coupled with soil characteristics related to aridification, would have detrimental effects on deciduous plants, while fostering giant graminoids; 2) in a scenario of no precipitation-reduction in wetter areas, warming might promote the expansion of evergreen to the detriment of deciduous plants. In both scenarios the net outcome implies increasing recalcitrance of leaf litter inputs, potentially weakening terrestrial-aquatic linkages in headwater streams.
OI Salinas Bonillo, Maria Jacoba/0000-0001-6931-6677
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1932-6203
PD JUN 28
PY 2018
VL 13
IS 6
AR e0199898
DI 10.1371/journal.pone.0199898
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000436645400089
PM 29953530
ER

PT J
AU Shivaprakash, KN
   Ramesh, BR
   Umashaanker, R
   Dayanandan, S
AF Shivaprakash, K. Nagaraju
   Ramesh, B. R.
   Umashaanker, Ramanan
   Dayanandan, Selvadurai
TI Functional trait and community phylogenetic analyses reveal
   environmental filtering as the major determinant of assembly of tropical
   forest tree communities in the Western Ghats biodiversity hotspot in
   India
SO FOREST ECOSYSTEMS
DT Article
DE Functional traits; Phylogenetic turnover; Deciduous; Evergreen;
   Niche-based processes; Human disturbance
ID BETA-DIVERSITY; COASTAL CALIFORNIA; CLIMATIC GRADIENTS; AMAZONIAN
   FOREST; REGIONAL-SCALE; PLANT TRAITS; WOOD DENSITY; PATTERNS; EVOLUTION;
   ECOLOGY
AB Background: Improved understanding of the processes shaping the assembly of tropical tree communities is crucial for gaining insights into the evolution of forest communities and biological diversity. The climate is thought to be the first order determinant of abundance and distribution patterns of tree species with contrasting traits such as evergreen and deciduous leaf phenology. However, the relative role of neutral, and niche-based processes in the evolution of these patterns remain poorly understood.
   Methods: Here, we perform an integrated analysis of the data on tree species abundance, functional traits and community phylogeny from a network of 96 forest plots, each 1 ha in size, distributed along a broad environmental gradient in the central Western Ghats, India. Then, we determine the relative importance of various process in assembly and structuring of tropical forest communities with evergreen and deciduous leaf phenology.
   Results: The deciduous leaf phenological trait has repeatedly evolved among multiple distantly related lineages. Tree communities in dry deciduous forests were phylogenetically clustered and showed a low range and variance of functional traits related to light harvesting, reproduction, and growth suggesting niche-based processes such as environmental filtering play a vital role in the assembly of tree communities in these forests. The external factors such as human-mediated disturbance also significantly, but to a lesser extent, influences the species and phylogenetic turnover.
   Conclusions: These findings revealed that the environmental filtering plays a significant role in assembly of tree communities in the biologically diverse tropical forests in the Western Ghats biodiversity hotspot.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 2095-6355
EI 2197-5620
PD JUN 25
PY 2018
VL 5
AR 25
DI 10.1186/s40663-018-0144-0
SC Forestry
UT WOS:000436445100001
ER

PT J
AU Dini-Andreote, F
   van Elsas, JD
   Olff, H
   Salles, JF
AF Dini-Andreote, Francisco
   van Elsas, Jan Dirk
   Olff, Han
   Salles, Joana Falcao
TI Dispersal-competition tradeoff in microbiomes in the quest for land
   colonization
SO SCIENTIFIC REPORTS
DT Article
ID SALT-MARSH; ECOLOGICAL SUCCESSION; ANTIBIOTIC-RESISTANCE; BACTERIAL
   CHEMOTAXIS; COMMUNITY SUCCESSION; FUNGAL COMMUNITIES; SOIL; POPULATIONS;
   HABITATS; IDENTIFICATION
AB Ancestor microbes started colonizing inland habitats approximately 2.7 to 3.5 billion years ago. With some exceptions, the key physiological adaptations of microbiomes associated with marine-to-land transitions have remained elusive. This is essentially caused by the lack of suitable systems that depict changes in microbiomes across sufficiently large time scales. Here, we investigate the adaptive routes taken by microbiomes along a contemporary gradient of land formation. Using functional trait-based metagenomics, we show that a switch from a microbial 'dispersal' to a 'competition' response modus best characterizes the microbial trait changes during this eco-evolutionary trajectory. The 'dispersal' modus prevails in microbiomes at the boundary sites between land and sea. It encompasses traits conferring cell chemosensory and motile behaviors, thus allowing the local microbes to exploit short-lived nutritional patches in high-diffusion microhabitats. A systematic transition towards the `competition' modus occurs progressively as the soil matures, which is likely due to forces of viscosity or strain that favor traits for competition and chemical defense. Concomitantly, progressive increases in the abundances of genes encoding antibiotic resistance and complex organic substrate degradation were found. Our findings constitute a novel perspective on the ecology and evolution of microbiome traits, tracking back one of the most seminal transitions in the evolutionary history of life.
RI Falcao Salles, Joana/A-7313-2008; Dini-Andreote, Francisco/M-6176-2017
OI Dini-Andreote, Francisco/0000-0002-6654-0769
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 2045-2322
PD JUN 21
PY 2018
VL 8
AR 9451
DI 10.1038/s41598-018-27783-6
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000435790500030
PM 29930350
ER

PT J
AU Hille, S
   Larsen, SE
   Rubaek, GH
   Kronvang, B
   Baattrup-Pedersen, A
AF Hille, Sandra
   Larsen, Soren E.
   Rubaek, Gitte H.
   Kronvang, Brian
   Baattrup-Pedersen, Annette
TI Does Regular Harvesting Increase Plant Diversity in Buffer Strips
   Separating Agricultural Land and Surface Waters ?
SO FRONTIERS IN ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
DT Article
DE buffer strips; harvest; plant traits; productivity; diversity;
   vegetation types
ID SPECIES RICHNESS; PHOSPHORUS; GRASSLAND; RIPARIAN; MANAGEMENT;
   PRODUCTIVITY; NITROGEN; COMMUNITIES; DISTURBANCE; VEGETATION
AB Vegetated buffer strips are often established in agricultural landscapes as an "edge of the field" mitigation measure against diffuse nutrient pollution of the aquatic environment. Harvesting of the vegetation has been suggested as a possible management strategy to prevent build-up of excessive amounts of nutrients in buffer soils and, at the same time, harvesting can have a positive effect on the diversity of the vegetation. However, the response of the vegetation to harvesting likely depends on taxonomic and functional characteristics. In the present study, we explored effects of harvesting frequency (by comparing harvesting once, twice, and four times per year to an unharvested control) on the taxonomic and functional trait composition of four different types of plant communities in buffer strips in Denmark. We found that one to two harvests per year mediated an increase in the diversity of the vegetation in low diversity buffer strips dominated by tall and productive herbs (tall herb fringe), whereas the diversity remained unchanged in buffer strips dominated by grasses as well as in more diverse buffer strips with rich fen and wet meadow species. We also found that harvesting changed the compositional patterns in the tall herb fringe community, with an increasing abundance of grasses and a declining abundance of tall herb species, in particular at a high harvesting frequency. Concomitant with these taxonomic changes, we observed changes in the trait composition of the community. The abundance of tall species declined in the tall herb fringe and in the tall grass community. Similarly, the abundance of productive species (as indicated by high Ellenberg N and Ellenberg R values) declined in the tall herb fringe (in areas harvested four times per year). We conclude that low frequency harvesting is a promising management strategy to increase plant diversity in buffer strips with an initially low diversity and high productivity and that harvesting over time can mediate a shift in compositional patterns toward less productive species.
OI Larsen, Soren Erik/0000-0001-8428-2065
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 2296-665X
PD JUN 19
PY 2018
VL 6
AR 58
DI 10.3389/fenvs.2018.00058
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000452124100001
ER

PT J
AU Jansen, J
   Hill, NA
   Dunstan, PK
   Eleaume, MP
   Johnson, CR
AF Jansen, Jan
   Hill, Nicole A.
   Dunstan, Piers K.
   Eleaume, Marc P.
   Johnson, Craig R.
TI Taxonomic Resolution, Functional Traits, and the Influence of Species
   Groupings on Mapping Antarctic Seafloor Biodiversity
SO FRONTIERS IN ECOLOGY AND EVOLUTION
DT Article
DE marine biodiversity; Southern Ocean; functional trait; taxonomic
   resolution; species archetype model; species distribution; Antarctica;
   benthic assemblages
ID MERTZ GLACIER; TERRE ADELIE; COMMUNITIES; ASSEMBLAGES; DIVERSITY;
   ABUNDANCE; SURROGACY; FRAMEWORK; MODELS; REGION
AB Benthic marine biodiversity on the Antarctic continental shelf is high and unique, yet its distributional patterns are still relatively poorly understood. Some of the main issues are that biological data are sparse, and that many species are rare and seem only weakly related to environmental conditions. Grouping species by taxonomic or functional similarity has historically been used to compensate for missing species identification, to generate a more widespread distribution of data-points, and this practice can help to gain a better understanding of the distribution of biodiversity. However, there are few guidelines on how to group species, the implicit assumptions about species associations in the groups are difficult to validate, and the information loss associated with grouping species is unknown. Here, we analyse whether grouping benthic macrofaunal species by taxonomic or functional similarity preserves distributional patterns seen in species distributions, using a model-based approach called "species archetype model" that groups species or other units based on the similarity in their responses to environmental factors. Using presence-absence data, the species archetype models identify twice as many assemblages when used on the highest taxonomic resolution data, than when applied to taxonomic data at lower resolution (e.g., class) or functional groups based on mobility, feeding type, and body shape. Further, confidence in the predictions of either taxonomic or functional groups is far less than for predictions based on the highest taxonomic resolution data. Although using functional groups is often thought to accumulate species with similar environmental responses, our analysis shows that functional groups may insufficiently resolve assemblage structure for presence-absence data. Model-based approaches provide key information to understanding the regional distribution of Antarctic marine biodiversity, and care needs to be taken when using a-priori groupings of species to make statements about the distribution of biodiversity.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 2296-701X
PD JUN 19
PY 2018
VL 6
AR UNSP 81
DI 10.3389/fevo.2018.00081
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000451661800001
ER

PT J
AU Alexandridis, N
   Bacher, C
   Desroy, N
   Jean, F
AF Alexandridis, Nikolaos
   Bacher, Cedric
   Desroy, Nicolas
   Jean, Fred
TI Individual-based simulation of the spatial and temporal dynamics of
   macroinvertebrate functional groups provides insights into benthic
   community assembly mechanisms
SO PEERJ
DT Article
DE Individual-based model; Inter-scale modeling; Functional groups; Benthic
   macroinvertebrates; Community assembly; Biological traits; Biotic
   interactions; alpha-diversity; beta-diversity; Rance estuary
ID FOOD WEBS; MARINE-INVERTEBRATES; BIODIVERSITY LOSS; CORAL-REEFS;
   ECOLOGY; MODELS; RECRUITMENT; PREDICTIONS; ESTUARINE; ENVIRONMENTS
AB The complexity and scales of the processes that shape communities of marine benthic macroinvertebrates has limited our understanding of their assembly mechanisms and the potential to make projections of their spatial and temporal dynamics. Individual-based models can shed light on community assembly mechanisms, by allowing observed spatiotemporal patterns to emerge from first principles about the modeled organisms. Previous work in the Rance estuary (Brittany, France) revealed the principal functional components of its benthic macroinvertebrate communities and derived a set of functional relationships between them. These elements were combined here for the development of a dynamic and spatially explicit model that operates at two spatial scales. At the fine scale, modeling each individual's life cycle allowed the representation of recruitment, inter-and intra-group competition, biogenic habitat modification and predation mortality. Larval dispersal and environmental filtering due to the tidal characteristics of the Rance estuary were represented at the coarse scale. The two scales were dynamically linked and the model was parameterized on the basis of theoretical expectations and expert knowledge. The model was able to reproduce some patterns of alpha-and beta-diversity that were observed in the Rance estuary in 1995. Model analysis demonstrated the role of local and regional processes, particularly early post-settlement mortality and spatially restricted dispersal, in shaping marine benthos. It also indicated biogenic habitat modification as a promising area for future research. The combination of this mechanism with different substrate types, along with the representation of physical disturbances and more trophic categories, could increase the model's realism. The precise parameterization and validation of the model is expected to extend its scope from the exploration of community assembly mechanisms to the formulation of predictions about the responses of community structure and functioning to environmental change.
OI Bacher, Cedric/0000-0001-6090-4667; Jean, Fred/0000-0002-1132-230X
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 2167-8359
PD JUN 18
PY 2018
VL 6
AR e5038
DI 10.7717/peerj.5038
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000435510100008
PM 29938137
ER

PT J
AU Gasbarro, R
   Wan, D
   Tunnicliffe, V
AF Gasbarro, Ryan
   Wan, Di
   Tunnicliffe, Verena
TI Composition and functional diversity of macrofaunal assemblages on
   vertical walls of a deep northeast Pacific fjord
SO MARINE ECOLOGY PROGRESS SERIES
DT Article
DE Epibenthos; Suspension feeders; Functional traits; Habitat formation;
   Flux; Douglas Channel
ID BRITISH-COLUMBIA; POPULATION-STRUCTURE; SUSPENSION FEEDERS; BENTHIC
   ORGANISMS; SPECIES-DIVERSITY; CURRENT KNOWLEDGE; SEA CORAL;
   BIODIVERSITY; GROWTH; FLOW
AB Fjords are temperate zone coastal features with strong horizontal and vertical environmental gradients, but the composition and function of biota living on the confining walls are poorly documented due to relative inaccessibility. We present results from remotely operated vehicle imagery of the subphotic (50 to 680 m depth) bedrock walls from 3 sites in Douglas Channel, a northeast Pacific fjord complex. We assessed the composition and abundance of the wall fauna and correlated these data with the water mass flux character of the fjord. Using a suite of morphological traits, we also identified areas of high function through habitat formation. This baseline record of hard substratum benthos in Douglas Channel revealed diverse assemblages marked by vertical zonation, dense animal cover (>= 80% areal cover in some areas), and some variation from fjord head to mouth. The deepest portions of the fjord at our most seaward site (<= 400 m) harbored the most taxonomically and functionally rich assemblages, with multiple species exclusive to this zone; there was a sharp increase in animal cover in shallow (<= 150 m) areas caused by the appearance of dictyonine glass sponges and increases in articulate brachiopod, zoanthid, and encrusting sponge cover. Animal cover was positively correlated with winter kinetic energy density fluxes, indicating that a consistent oceanic influx augments biomass above 150 m most likely by increasing particle delivery rates. Our findings demonstrate that fjord walls support high biomass, high functioning, diverse, and expansive biosystems that warrant further study and con sideration when developing coastal ocean management plans.
OI Gasbarro, Ryan/0000-0002-1719-7132
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0171-8630
EI 1616-1599
PD JUN 11
PY 2018
VL 597
BP 47
EP 64
DI 10.3354/meps12599
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology;
   Oceanography
UT WOS:000434964400005
ER

PT J
AU Nagelkerke, LAJ
   van Onselen, E
   van Kessel, N
   Leuven, RSEW
AF Nagelkerke, Leopold A. J.
   van Onselen, Eline
   van Kessel, Nils
   Leuven, Rob S. E. W.
TI Functional feeding traits as predictors of invasive success of alien
   freshwater fish species using a food-fish model
SO PLOS ONE
DT Article
ID GOBY NEOGOBIUS-MELANOSTOMUS; PONTO-CASPIAN GOBIES; BIOLOGICAL INVASIONS;
   MORPHOLOGY; PATTERNS; IMPACTS; ECOLOGY; COMPETITION; RESOURCES;
   RESPONSES
AB Invasions of Ponto-Caspian fish species into north-western European river basins accelerated since the opening of the Rhine-Main-Danube Canal in 1992. Since 2002, at least five Ponto-Caspian alien fish species have arrived in The Netherlands. Four species belong to the Gobiidae family (Neogobius fluviatilis, Neogobius melanostomus, Ponticola kessleri, and Proterorhinus semilunaris) and one to the Cyprinidae family (Romanogobio These species are expected to be potentially deleterious for the populations of four native benthic fish species: Gobio gobio (Cyprinidae), Barbatula barbatula (Nemacheilidae), Cottus perifretum, and C. rhenanus (Cottidae). Invasion success may be dependent on competitive trophic interactions with native species, which are enabled and/or constrained by feeding-related morphological traits. Twenty-two functional feeding traits were measured in nine species (in total 90 specimens). These traits were quantitatively linked to the mechanical, chemical and behavioral properties of a range of aquatic resource categories, using a previously developed food-fish model (FFM). The FFM was used to predict the trophic profile (TP) of each fish: the combined capacities to feed on each of the resource types. The most extreme TPs belonged to three alien species, indicating that they were most specialized among the studied species. Of these three, only P. kessleri overlapped with the two native Cottusspecies, indicating potential trophic competition. N. fluviatilis and R. belingi did not show any overlap, indicating that there is low trophic competition. The two remaining alien goby species (N. melanostomus and P. semilunaris) had average TPs and could be considered generalist feeders. They overlapped with each other and with G. gobio and B. barbatula, indicating potential trophic competition. This study suggests that both generalist and specialist species can be successful invaders. Since the FFM predicts potential interactions between species, it provides a tool to support horizon scanning and rapid risk assessments of alien species.
RI Leuven, Rob/A-3303-2012
OI Leuven, Rob/0000-0001-5434-6005
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 1932-6203
PD JUN 6
PY 2018
VL 13
IS 6
AR e0197636
DI 10.1371/journal.pone.0197636
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000434369400032
PM 29874244
ER

PT J
AU Sgier, L
   Merbt, SN
   Tlili, A
   Kroll, A
   Zupanic, A
AF Sgier, Linn
   Merbt, Stephanie N.
   Tlili, Ahmed
   Kroll, Alexandra
   Zupanic, Anze
TI Characterization of Aquatic Biofilms with Flow Cytometry
SO JOVE-JOURNAL OF VISUALIZED EXPERIMENTS
DT Article
DE Environmental Sciences; Issue 136; Biofilm; flow cytometry; monitoring;
   stochastic neighbor embedding; periphyton; microplastics; visualization
ID INDUCED COMMUNITY TOLERANCE; WASTE-WATER; T-SNE; PERIPHYTON; BACTERIA;
   CONTAMINATION; DISTURBANCE; LITTER; SINGLE; IMPACT
AB Biofilms are dynamic consortia of microorganism that play a key role in freshwater ecosystems. By changing their community structure, biofilms respond quickly to environmental changes and can be thus used as indicators of water quality. Currently, biofilm assessment is mostly based on integrative and functional endpoints, such as photosynthetic or respiratory activity, which do not provide information on the biofilm community structure. Flow cytometry and computational visualization offer an alternative, sensitive, and easy-to-use method for assessment of the community composition, particularly of the photoautotrophic part of freshwater biofilms. It requires only basic sample preparation, after which the entire sample is run through the flow cytometer. The single-cell optical and fluorescent information is used for computational visualization and biological interpretation. Its main advantages over other methods are the speed of analysis and the high-information-content nature. Flow cytometry provides information on several cellular and biofilm traits in a single measurement: particle size, density, pigment content, abiotic content in the biofilm, and coarse taxonomic information. However, it does not provide information on biofilm composition on the species level. We see high potential in the use of the method for environmental monitoring of aquatic ecosystems and as an initial biofilm evaluation step that informs downstream detailed investigations by complementary and more detailed methods.
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 1940-087X
PD JUN
PY 2018
IS 136
AR e57655
DI 10.3791/57655
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000444752100081
PM 29939166
ER

PT J
AU Karimi, E
   Slaby, BM
   Soares, AR
   Blom, J
   Hentschel, U
   Costa, R
AF Karimi, Elham
   Slaby, Beate M.
   Soares, Andre R.
   Blom, Jochen
   Hentschel, Ute
   Costa, Rodrigo
TI Metagenomic binning reveals versatile nutrient cycling and distinct
   adaptive features in alphaproteobacterial symbionts of marine sponges
SO FEMS MICROBIOLOGY ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE Porifera; metagenomics; functional genomics; Rhodospirillaceae;
   host-microbe interactions; sulfur metabolism
ID N-ACYL-TAURINE; BACTERIAL COMMUNITIES; VERTICAL TRANSMISSION;
   ROSEOBACTER LINEAGE; THEONELLA-SWINHOEI; WEB SERVER; GENOMES; DIVERSITY;
   INSIGHTS; MICROORGANISMS
AB Marine sponges are early-branched metazoans known to harbor dense and diverse microbial communities. Yet the role of the so far uncultivable alphaproteobacterial lineages that populate these sessile invertebrates remains unclear. We applied a sequence composition-dependent binning approach to assemble
   one Rhodospirillaceaegenome from the Spongia officinalis microbial metagenome and contrast its functional features with those of closely related sponge-associated and free-living genomes. Both symbiotic and free-living Rhodospirillaceae shared a suite of common features, possessing versatile carbon, nitrogen, sulfur and phosphorus metabolisms. Symbiotic genomes could be distinguished from their free-living counterparts by the lack of chemotaxis and motility traits, enrichment of genes required for the uptake and utilization of organic sulfur compounds-particularly taurine-, higher diversity and abundance of ABC transporters, and a distinct repertoire of genes involved in natural product biosynthesis, plasmid stability, cell detoxification and oxidative stress remediation. These sessile symbionts may more effectively contribute to host fitness via nutrient exchange, and also host detoxification and chemical defense. Considering the worldwide occurrence and high diversity of sponge-associated Rhodospirillaceae verified here using a tailored in silico approach, we suggest that these organisms are not only relevant to holobiont homeostasis but also to nutrient cycling in benthic ecosystems.
RI Hentschel, Ute/H-8343-2013
OI Hentschel, Ute/0000-0003-0596-790X; Karimi, Elham/0000-0002-2204-0789;
   Slaby, Beate/0000-0002-9480-1460; da Silva Costa,
   Rodrigo/0000-0002-5932-4101
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0168-6496
EI 1574-6941
PD JUN
PY 2018
VL 94
IS 6
AR UNSP fiy074
DI 10.1093/femsec/fiy074
SC Microbiology
UT WOS:000439783400014
PM 29701776
ER

PT J
AU Xu, GJ
   Zhong, XX
   Al, MA
   Warren, A
   Xu, HL
AF Xu, Guangjian
   Zhong, Xiaoxiao
   Al, Mamun Abdullah
   Warren, Alan
   Xu, Henglong
TI Identifying bioindicators across trait-taxon space for assessing water
   quality in marine environments
SO MARINE POLLUTION BULLETIN
DT Article
DE Bioindicator; Functional trait; Monitoring program; Protozoa; Redundancy
   analysis; Trait-taxon space
ID ASSESSING FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; BIOFILM-DWELLING PROTOZOA; COASTAL
   WATERS; ECOSYSTEM PROCESSES; BENTHIC ECOSYSTEMS; BIOLOGICAL TRAITS;
   SPECIES POOL; YELLOW SEA; BIODIVERSITY; COMMUNITIES
AB The response units of protozoan communities, based on a community-weighted mean (CWM) dataset across trait-taxon space, were investigated in order to determine their utility as bioindicators of marine water quality. From a total of 17 functional categories of seven biological traits, three functional response units (FRUs) were identified at correlation levels of > 0.75. FRUs 1 and 3 generally dominated the communities in more polluted areas during warm seasons, while FRU2 appeared to prefer less polluted waters and dominated the communities in spring and winter. Correlation analysis demonstrated that the CWM values of FRUs 1 and 3 were significantly positively correlated to the concentrations of chemical oxygen demand (COD), whereas those of FRU2 were negatively correlated to COD. Across taxon-function space, 16 species were identified as potential bioindicators of water quality. These results suggest that redundancy analysis across trait-taxon space is a useful tool for identifying indicators of environmental quality.
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0025-326X
EI 1879-3363
PD JUN
PY 2018
VL 131
BP 565
EP 571
DI 10.1016/j.marpolbul.2018.04.044
PN A
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000437060300064
PM 29886983
ER

PT J
AU Xu, Y
   Stoeck, T
   Forster, D
   Ma, ZH
   Zhang, LQ
   Fan, XP
AF Xu, Yuan
   Stoeck, Thorsten
   Forster, Dominik
   Ma, Zuhang
   Zhang, Liquan
   Fan, Xinpeng
TI Environmental status assessment using biological traits analyses and
   functional diversity indices of benthic ciliate communities
SO MARINE POLLUTION BULLETIN
DT Article
DE Bio-indicator; Marine; Protozoans; Wetland; Yangtze estuary
ID WATER-QUALITY STATUS; PROTOZOAN COMMUNITIES; SALINITY GRADIENT; MARINE
   ECOSYSTEMS; FISH COMMUNITIES; SOIL PROTOZOA; ANALYSIS BTA; DYNAMICS;
   ECOLOGY; BIOINDICATORS
AB In this study, we tested the hypothesis that the functional diversity of benthic ciliates has high potential to monitor marine ecological status. Therefore, we investigated the spatial and temporal variation of functional diversity of benthic ciliates in the Yangtze Estuary during one year using biological traits analyses and functional diversity indices. Traits and community compositions showed clear spatial and temporal variations. Among a variety of biological traits, feeding type and body size emerged as strongest predictable variables. Functional divergence (FDiv) had an advantage over two other functional diversity indices, as well as over classical diversity measures (i.e. richness, evenness, Shannon-Wiener) to infer environmental status. Significant correlations between biological traits, FDiv and environmental variables (i.e. nutrients, temperature, salinity) suggested that functional diversity of benthic ciliates might be used as a bio-indicator in environmental status assessments. Further mandatory researches need to implement functional diversity of ciliates in routine monitoring programs were discussed.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0025-326X
EI 1879-3363
PD JUN
PY 2018
VL 131
BP 646
EP 654
DI 10.1016/j.marpolbul.2018.04.064
PN A
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000437060300072
PM 29886992
ER

PT J
AU Garbin, ML
   Misaki, F
   Ferreira, PF
   Guidoni-Martins, KG
   Soares, RB
   Mariotte, P
   Sansevero, JBB
   Rocha, PG
   Silva, AG
AF Garbin, Mario L.
   Misaki, Flora
   Ferreira, Poliana F.
   Guidoni-Martins, Karlo G.
   Soares, Rayara B.
   Mariotte, Pierre
   Sansevero, Jeronimo B. B.
   Rocha, Patryck Gouvea
   Silva, Ary G.
TI Long-term regeneration of a tropical plant community after sand mining
SO ECOLOGY AND EVOLUTION
DT Article
DE community assembly; disturbance; facilitation; natural regeneration;
   restinga; sand mining
ID ATLANTIC RAIN-FOREST; SUBTROPICAL COASTAL DUNE; SOUTHEASTERN BRAZIL;
   MULTIVARIATE-ANALYSIS; NORTHERN THAILAND; FUNCTIONAL TRAITS; SPECIES
   RICHNESS; SWAMP FOREST; RESTORATION; ECOSYSTEMS
AB Sandy coastal plant communities in tropical regions have been historically under strong anthropic pressure. In Brazil, these systems shelter communities with highly plastic plant species. However, the potential of these systems to regenerate without human assistance after disturbances has hardly been examined. We determined the natural regeneration of a coastal sandy plain vegetation (restinga) in Brazil, 16years after the end of sand removal. We inventoried 38 plots: 20 within a sand-mined site and 18 in an adjacent undisturbed site. We expected lower diversity values in the sand-mined site compared to the undisturbed site, but similar species composition between the two sites due to the spatial proximity of the two sites and the high plasticity of restinga species. Species were ranked using abundance and importance value index in both sites, and comparisons were performed using Renyi entropy profiles, rarefaction curves, principal component analysis, and redundancy analysis. Species composition and dominant species differed markedly between the two sites. Bromeliads and Clusia hilariana, well-known nurse plants, dominated the undisturbed site but were almost absent in the regenerating site. Species richness did not differ between both sites, but diversity was higher in the undisturbed site. Within-site composition differences in the mined area were associated with field characteristics. Interestingly, species classified as subordinate or rare in the undisturbed site became dominants in the regenerating site. These newer dominants in the sand-mined site are not those known as nurse plants in other restingas, thus yielding strong implications for restoration.
OI Mariotte, Pierre/0000-0001-8570-8742; Guidoni Martins, Karlo
   Gregorio/0000-0002-8458-8467; Garbin, Mario/0000-0003-4137-2102; Silva,
   Ary/0000-0003-3079-7316
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 2045-7758
PD JUN
PY 2018
VL 8
IS 11
BP 5712
EP 5723
DI 10.1002/ece3.4111
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000435776600044
PM 29938087
ER

PT J
AU Veen, GF
   Keiser, AD
   van der Putten, WH
   Wardle, DA
AF Veen, G. F. (Ciska)
   Keiser, Ashley D.
   van der Putten, Wim H.
   Wardle, David A.
TI Variation in home-field advantage and ability in leaf litter
   decomposition across successional gradients
SO FUNCTIONAL ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE decomposition; functional breadth; plant litter feedback; plant-soil
   feedback; soil; succession
ID PLANT-SOIL FEEDBACK; TERRESTRIAL ECOSYSTEMS; QUALITY; TRAITS; RATES;
   MECHANISMS; CLIMATE; FOREST; MODEL; PINE
AB 1. It is increasingly recognized that interactions between plants and soil (a)biotic conditions can influence local decomposition processes. For example, decomposer communities may become specialized in breaking down litter of plant species that they are associated with, resulting in accelerated decomposition, known as "home-field advantage" (HFA). Also, soils can vary inherently in their capacity to degrade organic compounds, known as "ability." However, we have a poor understanding how environmental conditions drive the occurrence of HFA and ability.
   2. Here, we studied how HFA and ability change across three types of successional gradients: coastal sand dunes (primary succession), inland drift sands (primary succession) and ex-arable fields (secondary succession). Across these gradients, litter quality (i.e. nutrient, carbon and lignin contents) increases with successional time for coastal dunes and decreases for the other two gradients.
   3. We performed a 12-months reciprocal litter transplant experiment under greenhouse conditions using soils and litters collected from early-, mid- and late-successional stages of each gradient.
   4. We found that HFA and ability did not consistently shift with successional stage for all gradients, but were instead specific for each type of successional gradient. In coastal dunes, HFA was positive for early-successional litter, in drift, sands it was negative for mid-successional litter, and for ex-arable fields, HFA increased with successional time. Ability of decomposer communities was highest in mid-successional stages for coastal dunes and drift sands, but for ex-arable fields, ability decreased throughout with successional time. High HFA was related to high litter C content and soil and organic matter content in soils and to low litter and soil nutrient concentrations. Ability did not consistently occur in successional stages with high or low litter quality.
   5. Synthesis. Our findings show that specific environmental conditions, such as changes in litter or soil quality, along environmental gradients can shape the influence of HFA and ability on decomposition. In sites with strong HFA or ability, interactions between plants, litter and decomposer communities will be important drivers of nutrient cycling and hence have the potential to feedback to plant growth.
RI Wardle, David/F-6031-2011; van der Putten, Wim/C-3707-2011; Veen,
   Ciska/A-2981-2012
OI Wardle, David/0000-0002-0476-7335; van der Putten,
   Wim/0000-0002-9341-4442; Veen, Ciska/0000-0001-7736-9998
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 0269-8463
EI 1365-2435
PD JUN
PY 2018
VL 32
IS 6
BP 1563
EP 1574
DI 10.1111/1365-2435.13107
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000435442500013
ER

PT J
AU Malavasi, M
   Bartak, V
   Carranza, ML
   Simova, P
   Acosta, ATR
AF Malavasi, Marco
   Bartak, Vojta
   Carranza, Maria Laura
   Simova, Petra
   Acosta, Alicia T. R.
TI Landscape pattern and plant biodiversity in Mediterranean coastal dune
   ecosystems: Do habitat loss and fragmentation really matter?
SO JOURNAL OF BIOGEOGRAPHY
DT Article
DE functional trait dispersion; habitat loss; linear dynamic landscapes;
   Mediterranean coastal dunes; mixed-effect models; multi-scale
   fragmentation; plant diversity facets
ID FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; SPECIES RICHNESS; CENTRAL ARGENTINA; AMOUNT
   HYPOTHESIS; TRAITS; EXTINCTION; VEGETATION; DISPERSAL; HETEROGENEITY;
   CONFIGURATION
AB Aim: Habitat fragmentation and loss are two of the most important factors driving current biodiversity decline. Nonetheless, the relationship between biodiversity and landscape patterns appears more complex than generally expected, depending on the species and communities involved. We aim to enrich knowledge concerning the relationship between plant diversity and landscape patterns along linear landscapes, such as Mediterranean coastal dunes. A dedicated buffering method considering multiple nested extents was developed for sampling linear landscapes (e.g. coastal or fluvial), which traditionally present a challenge for standard round or square sampling buffering approaches.
   Location: Tyrrhenian coast of central Italy.
   Methods: Based on a database of plant community plots and functional traits from field measurements, for each plot we calculated taxonomic (TD) and functional (FD) diversity, which was further decomposed in functional evenness (FDeven) and mean trait dispersion (FDdisp). Relying on a land-cover map, we computed a set of landscape metrics describing habitat loss, fragmentation and direct human disturbance at multiple extents around each plot. Diversity measures (TD, FD, FDeven and FDdisp) were then related to the landscape metrics at different scales via linear mixed-effect models.
   Results: Overall, the relationship between plant species diversity and landscape patterns was weak. We observed different responses of TD, FD, FDeven and FDdisp, which only emerged at fine-medium scales. TD decreased with habitat loss and disturbance, while FD only with disturbance. FDeven decreased in more fragmented areas, while FDdisp was not affected by the selected landscape parameters.
   Main conclusions: Like other transitional areas, coastal strand and dune ecosystems exhibit steep gradients in biotic and environmental factors, are dynamic in location, and could be among the earliest to be affected by environmental drivers. However, the response of Mediterranean coastal dune plant diversity to habitat loss and fragmentation is weak. For these reasons, we propose that these plant communities are adapted to the ever-changing nature of the coastal environment and consequently to changes in landscape pattern.
RI Carranza, Maria Laura/E-7698-2012
OI Carranza, Maria Laura/0000-0001-5753-890X; Acosta, Alicia T.
   R./0000-0001-6572-3187; Malavasi, Marco/0000-0002-9639-1784
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 0305-0270
EI 1365-2699
PD JUN
PY 2018
VL 45
IS 6
BP 1367
EP 1377
DI 10.1111/jbi.13215
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Physical Geography
UT WOS:000435275300016
ER

PT J
AU Montefalcone, M
   De Falco, G
   Nepote, E
   Canessa, M
   Bertolino, M
   Bavestrello, G
   Morri, C
   Bianchi, CN
AF Montefalcone, Monica
   De Falco, Giada
   Nepote, Ettore
   Canessa, Martina
   Bertolino, Marco
   Bavestrello, Giorgio
   Morri, Carla
   Bianchi, Carlo Nike
TI Thirty year ecosystem trajectories in a submerged marine cave under
   changing pressure regime
SO MARINE ENVIRONMENTAL RESEARCH
DT Article
DE Marine caves; Multiple stressors; Climate change; Local disturbances;
   Non-taxonomic descriptors; Mediterranean sea
ID EASTERN MEDITERRANEAN SEA; PROTECTED AREAS; LIGURIAN SEA; BENTHIC
   COMMUNITIES; POSIDONIA-OCEANICA; SPONGE COMMUNITY; SUBMARINE CAVES;
   MASS-MORTALITY; HUMAN IMPACT; HEAT-WAVE
AB Marine caves are unique and vulnerable habitats exhibiting high biodiversity and heterogeneity, but threatened by multiple global and local disturbances. Marine caves, although widely distributed along the Mediterranean coast, suffer for the lack of quantitative data on their structure and function, which hinder their conservation status assessment. Thanks to the availability of a nearly 30-year-long series of data (1986-2013), we evaluated ecosystem change in the Bergeggi marine cave (Ligurian Sea, NW Mediterranean), a cave with a complex shape and high habitat heterogeneity. Non-taxonomic descriptors were adopted, namely growth forms (GF) and trophic guilds (TG), which are informative about ecosystem structure and functioning, respectively. The cave experienced a general trend of change during the last three decades, mainly due to the decline in the cover of sessile organisms (especially 3-dimensional forms) matched by an increase of turf and sediment, thus causing the structural and functional homogenization of the cave community. While change before 2004 had been attributed to climatic factors (especially to the summer heat waves of 1999 and 2003), the most important rate of change was observed between 2009 and 2013, coinciding with recent major beach nourishments and the extension of the neighbouring Vado Ligure harbour, thus providing evidences on the importance of local disturbances deriving from coastal interventions. Monitoring the status of cave ecosystems is urgently needed, and the use of effective indicators, such as the specific traits here adopted (morphology and feeding strategy), could provide effective tools to assist marine cave conservation.
OI MONTEFALCONE, MONICA/0000-0002-3851-1880; Bianchi, Carlo
   Nike/0000-0003-1071-3285; Canessa, Martina/0000-0001-5371-8452
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 0141-1136
EI 1879-0291
PD JUN
PY 2018
VL 137
BP 98
EP 110
DI 10.1016/j.marenvres.2018.02.022
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology;
   Toxicology
UT WOS:000432758200010
PM 29548762
ER

PT J
AU Nasi, F
   Nordstrom, MC
   Bonsdorff, E
   Auriemma, R
   Cibic, T
   Del Negro, P
AF Nasi, F.
   Nordstrom, M. C.
   Bonsdorff, E.
   Auriemma, R.
   Cibic, T.
   Del Negro, P.
TI Functional biodiversity of marine soft-sediment polychaetes from two
   Mediterranean coastal areas in relation to environmental stress
SO MARINE ENVIRONMENTAL RESEARCH
DT Article
DE Biological traits analysis; Polychaets; Soft-sediments; Environmental
   stress; Coastal areas
ID TARANTO IONIAN SEA; NORTHERN ADRIATIC SEA; ECOSYSTEM FUNCTION;
   CONTAMINATED SEDIMENTS; BENTHIC COMMUNITIES; SPECIES TRAITS;
   ORGANIC-CARBON; CLIMATE-CHANGE; DIVERSITY; PICCOLO
AB Biological Traits Analysis (BTA) was used to identify functional features of infaunal polychaete assemblages associated with contamination in two Italian coastal areas: the harbour of Trieste (Adriatic Sea) and the Mar Piccolo of Taranto (Ionian Sea). The analysis was performed on 103 taxa, collected at four stations in each area. The two areas differed in species composition. The low diversity and the presence of stress-tolerant species in more polluted sites were not reflected in functional diversity, due to species contributing little to community functions or being functionally redundant. Sand and clay fractions were significant drivers of trait category expressions, however other environmental parameters (depth, total organic carbon and nitrogen, and Hg in sediments) influenced traits composition. Motile was the prevalent trait in environments with coarse sediments, and tube-builder were related to fine-grained ones. Motile, endobenthic and burrower were essential traits for living in contaminated sediments. Epibenthic and sessile polychaetes dominated at stations subjected to high organic loads. BTA offers an integrative approach to detect functional adaptations to contaminated sediments and multiple anthropogenic stressors.
OI Nordstrom, Marie/0000-0001-5763-1813
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0141-1136
EI 1879-0291
PD JUN
PY 2018
VL 137
BP 121
EP 132
DI 10.1016/j.marenvres.2018.03.002
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology;
   Toxicology
UT WOS:000432758200012
PM 29551408
ER

PT J
AU Pease, AA
   Mendoza-Carranza, M
   Winemiller, KO
AF Pease, Allison A.
   Mendoza-Carranza, Manuel
   Winemiller, Kirk O.
TI Feeding ecology and ecomorphology of cichlid assemblages in a large
   Mesoamerican river delta
SO ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY OF FISHES
DT Article
DE Cichlidae; Morphological traits; Niche overlap; Neotropical
ID STREAM FISH ASSEMBLAGE; FRESH-WATER FISHES; NEOTROPICAL CICHLIDS; LAKE
   MALAWI; FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; SOUTHEASTERN MEXICO; BIOSPHERE RESERVE;
   MORPHOLOGY; EVOLUTION; NICHE
AB Fish assemblages in tropical lowland rivers are characterized by a high richness of species that feed on a diverse array of food resources. Although closely related species often have similar feeding ecology, species within the family Cichlidae display a broad spectrum of trophic niches, and resource partitioning has been inferred from studies conducted in Neotropical rivers. We investigated interspecific variation in food resource use and its relationship to morphological variation among cichlid fishes within the Pantanos de Centla Biosphere Reserve, a coastal area encompassing the delta of the Grijalva-Usumacinta River in Tabasco, Mexico. Most species consumed benthic crustaceans, aquatic insect larvae, and detritus, but some were more herbivorous, and one species was a specialized piscivore. Dietary niche overlap among species was higher than expected for one assemblage, and similar to random expectations for another, suggesting a lesser role for resource partitioning than has been shown for some cichlid assemblages, perhaps due to availability of abundant resources, even in low-water conditions. Canonical correspondence analysis revealed that greatest morphological differences am7ong species involved functional traits directly associated with resource use. Relationships between feeding ecology and morphology were similar to those described for other riverine cichlids. Strong ecomorphological relationships facilitate inferences about the ecology of cichlid species, including species that currently lack data from field studies. Knowledge of ecological relationships will be important for conservation in the Pantanos de Centla, an ecosystem of global significance for biodiversity and ecosystem services.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0378-1909
EI 1573-5133
PD JUN
PY 2018
VL 101
IS 6
BP 867
EP 879
DI 10.1007/s10641-018-0743-1
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000432321600001
ER

PT J
AU Orsi, CH
   Message, HJ
   Debona, T
   Baumgartner, D
   Baumgartner, G
AF Orsi, Carlos Henrique
   Message, Hugo Jose
   Debona, Tiago
   Baumgartner, Dirceu
   Baumgartner, Gilmar
TI Hydrological seasonality dictates fish fauna of the lower Araguaia
   River, Tocantins-Araguaia basin
SO ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY OF FISHES
DT Article
DE Flow; Flood; Dry; CPUE; Fish community; Fish composition; Functional
   traits
ID FLOODPLAIN LAKES; TROPICAL RIVER; SOUTH-AMERICA; ASSEMBLAGES; COMMUNITY;
   BRAZIL; ENVIRONMENTS; CONSERVATION; DIVERSITY; GRADIENTS
AB Hydrological seasonality of flow dictates diversity in tropical aquatic ecosystems. Large tropical rivers and tributaries are typically more depth and shows increased flow velocity and area in flood than in dry season. A thorough analysis of seasonality effect on fish community structure can provide valuable information of major forces driving tropical communities. However, these types of analyses have been limited by poor knowledge of tropical diversity, human impacts on environment, and biased sampling methods. We used a pristine large tropical river (and tributaries) and five types (12 gill nets, beach seine nets, longlines, branch baited hooks, and cast nets) of fishing gears to present an evaluation of flow seasonality effect on fish community. We sampled fourteen sites in river channel and tributaries in the lower Araguaia River. Sampling was conducted in flood (March and May 2009) and dry (July and September 2009) seasons of a typical seasonal year. Species richness, Shannon Diversity and Evenness, mean similarity of binary data, and abundance (CPUE) were analyzed by PERMANOVA and PCoA. We also analyzed the species most correlated (by Spearman correlation rank) with flood and dry season. Features differed significantly between flood and dry seasons, but not between channel and tributaries. The composition and abundance of community, and the representative species of flood and dry changed quite along the year. Flood showed lotic-related species, and dry presented lentic-related species. Thus, we achieved an alternation of fish community between season, both for channel and tributaries.
TC 0
Z9 1
SN 0378-1909
EI 1573-5133
PD JUN
PY 2018
VL 101
IS 6
BP 881
EP 897
DI 10.1007/s10641-018-0744-0
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000432321600002
ER

PT J
AU Larrain-Barrios, B
   Faundez-Yancas, L
   Burquez, A
AF Larrain-Barrios, Barbara
   Faundez-Yancas, Luis
   Burquez, Alberto
TI Plant functional trait structure in two fog deserts of America
SO FLORA
DT Article
DE Community convergence; Baja California; Atacama; Vegetation; Coastal
   desert; Cluster analysis
ID BAJA-CALIFORNIA; ATACAMA DESERT; NORTHERN CHILE; ENCELIA-FARINOSA; LEAF
   PUBESCENCE; CLIMATE-CHANGE; SOUTH-AMERICA; MEXICO; CONVERGENCE;
   EVOLUTION
AB Regions with similar environmental determinants are known to produce the independent evolution of similar features in unrelated species. This hypothesis is pervasive in ecology evolution and biogeography. To explore community convergence in trait structure, we compared perennial plant species assemblages in samples of a representative section of two distant and isolated coastal fog deserts of North and South America. These fog deserts are considered equivalent biomes, but there is a paucity of quantitative data to objectively support their similarities. General climate in both deserts showed the same trends, but Atacama exhibited almost no precipitation and had a stronger influence of fog. We found no shared species in our plots and limited phylogenetic relatedness. A two way cluster analysis separated groups of traits in fog deserts from neighboring dry deserts and Mediterranean systems. We found remarkable similarities in functional structure of fog deserts; 65% of the 26 studied functional trait categories showed less than 12% difference in relative cover among them. Three functional plant groups (deciduous, evergreen and succulent-CAM) were well defined when using hierarchical clustering. The deciduous group was dominant in both areas. There was a strong community convergence in vegetation structure, but some traits inevitably differed among deserts. Our results resolved in quantitative terms the similarities among functional traits, and indicated the need to expand the fine scale study of plant trait convergence in fog deserts.
RI Zorger, Bianca/O-1015-2018
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0367-2530
EI 1618-0585
PD JUN
PY 2018
VL 243
BP 1
EP 10
DI 10.1016/j.flora.2018.03.005
SC Plant Sciences; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000432467800001
ER

PT J
AU Dinh, YTH
   Death, RG
AF Dinh, Yen T. H.
   Death, Russell G.
TI Do disturbance and periphyton productivity affect stream invertebrate
   traits?
SO FRESHWATER SCIENCE
DT Article
DE invertebrate traits; presence/absence of forest canopy; flood
   disturbance; loss of periphyton food; flow stability
ID ECOLOGICAL RISK-ASSESSMENT; SPECIES TRAITS; MACROINVERTEBRATE
   COMMUNITIES; HABITAT TEMPLET; LAND-USE; AQUATIC INSECTS; RIVER;
   PATTERNS; DIVERSITY; RESPONSES
AB Disturbance in lotic ecosystems strongly influences which animals can survive and how those ecosystems function. Flow disturbances physically remove animals and periphyton, but it is unclear whether physical removal of individuals or the loss of food is the principal driver of effects of flow disturbances on invertebrate communities. Invertebrates possess traits that help them withstand high flows or recolonize rapidly after floods. At light-limited, closed-canopy sites, periphyton biomass should be unaffected by disturbances, so disturbance should affect invertebrate community trait composition by direct removal of animals. At open-canopy sites, disturbance should affect trait composition by both removing individuals and reducing periphyton food resources. We investigated whether a trait-based approach could elucidate drivers of effects of flow disturbance on benthic invertebrate communities and better identify potential mechanistic linkages. We sampled 10 autotrophic streams that differed in substrate-disturbance regime and varied from 100 to 0% canopy cover. We sampled 2 sites per stream, 1 in forest (closed-canopy) and 1 downstream in low-intensity agricultural grassland (open-canopy). Regardless of canopy, in streams with greater substrate disturbance, the proportion of individuals that respired with a plastron increased and proportions of individuals having 2 aquatic life stages or that were filter-feeders decreased. At open-canopy sites, the proportion of collector?gatherers with flattened bodies increased with increased substrate disturbance and decreased periphyton biomass, and the proportion of taxa having high body flexibility and 2 aquatic life stages increased with decreased substrate disturbance and increased periphyton biomass. Trait composition of these mountain stream invertebrate communities is strongly influenced by physical removal via substrate movement and by reduced periphyton resources.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 2161-9549
EI 2161-9565
PD JUN
PY 2018
VL 37
IS 2
BP 367
EP 379
DI 10.1086/697924
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000432253900015
ER

PT J
AU Botwe, PK
   Carver, S
   Magierowski, R
   McEvoy, P
   Goonan, P
   Madden, C
   Barmuta, LA
AF Botwe, Paul K.
   Carver, Scott
   Magierowski, Regina
   McEvoy, Paul
   Goonan, Peter
   Madden, Chris
   Barmuta, Leon A.
TI Effects of salinity and flow interactions on macroinvertebrate traits in
   temporary streams
SO ECOLOGICAL INDICATORS
DT Article
DE Flow; Salinity; Interaction; Temporary streams; Trait; Macroinvertebrate
ID BIOLOGICAL TRAITS; COMMUNITY STRUCTURE; AQUATIC INSECTS; FRESH-WATER;
   NEW-ZEALAND; BENTHIC MACROINVERTEBRATES; INVERTEBRATE TRAITS; REDUNDANCY
   ANALYSIS; FUNCTIONAL TRAITS; SPECIES TRAITS
AB Increasing salinity in freshwater ecosystems is globally widespread, especially, in arid and semi-arid regions, and can co-occur with flow intermittency, particularly in temporary streams. Both these stressors are known to affect macroinvertebrate traits individually, but their interactive effects have not been previously considered. There are inconsistencies reported in the literature regarding the response of particular traits to flow or salinity, and accordingly, we hypothesized that interactive effects between these two stressors may underlie inconsistencies in the literature. We used multivariate and univariate approaches to investigate the effects of salinity and flow interactions on macroinvertebrate traits using 13 years of data sampled across multiple sites in South Australia, the driest state in the driest inhabited continent in the world. Ovoviviparity, multivoltinism, aerial respiration and strong fliers were favoured as salinity increased, while medium-high physiological sensitivity to salinity and respiration via gills decreased. During low flows, holometaboly, univoltinism, high rheophily, cool eurythermality, streamlined body shape and gill respiration decreased, while aerial respiration and fliers and high crawling rate increased. Interestingly, traits with inconsistent responses (e.g. burrowing, tegument respiration and collector-gathering traits) in the literature were associated with interactions between flow and salinity in our study. These traits showed a similar interaction, by being least abundant in streams with high salinity and low flows, and low salinity and high flows. The interactions seem to be driven by the differential response of different taxa with the same trait category being abundant in different parts of the interaction plot. Our findings suggest that, in addition to differences in methodological and analytical approaches, interactions may also underlie inconsistencies in trait responses to flow and salinity. Finally, to foster the operative use of traits to resolve the effects of multiple stressors on ecosystems, there is the need for a better mechanistic understanding of how specific stressors (e.g. flow and salinity) act as trait filters, potentially through the use of experiments, to ensure that each of the stressors is strong enough to produce clear trait responses.
OI Barmuta, Leon/0000-0002-8946-3727
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1470-160X
EI 1872-7034
PD JUN
PY 2018
VL 89
BP 74
EP 83
DI 10.1016/j.ecolind.2018.01.036
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000430760900008
ER

PT J
AU Fu, H
   Yuan, GX
   Lou, Q
   Dai, TT
   Xu, J
   Cao, T
   Ni, LY
   Zhong, JY
   Fang, SW
AF Fu, Hui
   Yuan, Guixiang
   Lou, Qian
   Dai, Taotao
   Xu, Jun
   Cao, Te
   Ni, Leyi
   Zhong, Jiayou
   Fang, Shaowen
TI Functional traits mediated cascading effects of water depth and light
   availability on temporal stability of a macrophyte species
SO ECOLOGICAL INDICATORS
DT Article
DE Aquatic macrophyte; Population stability; Physiological and
   morphological trait; Water depth; Light availability
ID 3 SUBMERSED MACROPHYTES; POPULATION STABILITY; ECOSYSTEM STABILITY;
   PLANT-COMMUNITIES; DIVERSITY; PRODUCTIVITY; BIODIVERSITY; ASYNCHRONY;
   GRASSLAND; GROWTH
AB Interspecific trait variability (e.g., functional diversity) is often correlated with community productivity and thus promotes ecosystem stability. However, we know little about how intraspecific trait variability mediated the effects of environmental gradients on population stability. We applied generalized multilevel path models to investigate multivariate causal hypotheses that environmental effects on population stability of a macrophyte species - Potamogeton maackianus - are mediated by physiological and morphological traits variability. Using a hierarchical nested design, we measured quarterly nine physiological traits, and monthly ten morphological traits from 9720 individuals at 27 plots along water depth gradients in Lake Erhai, China. Results showed that changes in water depth and light availability caused significant shifts in intraspecific trait variability, with cascading direct and indirect effects on temporal stability of P. maackianus. Water depth exerted major control over population stability, both directly and indirectly via shifts in morphological and physiological traits. Light availability affected population stability indirectly by altering morphological traits. Size traits (shoot morphology and root/shoot ratio) and metabolic traits captured the effect of water depth and light availability on population stability with a relative high accuracy. Our study provide a strong support to the hypothesis that intraspecific trait variability mediate the combined effects of variations on water depth and light conditions on the temporal stability of a dominant macrophtye species in Lake Erhai. Maintaining and enhancing trait variability within plant populations may help to buffer negative effects of anthropogenic environmental changes on population stability.
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 1470-160X
EI 1872-7034
PD JUN
PY 2018
VL 89
BP 168
EP 174
DI 10.1016/j.ecolind.2018.02.010
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000430760900017
ER

PT J
AU Leruste, A
   Villeger, S
   Malet, N
   De Wit, R
   Bec, B
AF Leruste, A.
   Villeger, S.
   Malet, N.
   De Wit, R.
   Bec, B.
TI Complementarity of the multidimensional functional and the taxonomic
   approaches to study phytoplankton communities in three Mediterranean
   coastal lagoons of different trophic status
SO HYDROBIOLOGIA
DT Article
DE Classification; Functional entity; Functional traits; Taxonomic
   diversity
ID MARINE-PHYTOPLANKTON; LAKE PHYTOPLANKTON; DIVERSITY; ECOLOGY; PATTERNS;
   TRAITS; SIZE; CLASSIFICATION; SYNECHOCOCCUS; DISTURBANCE
AB We used the individual-based multidimensional functional diversity and the taxonomic approaches in a complementary way to describe phytoplankton communities in three coastal lagoons with different eutrophication status in the South of France. We sampled communities during three seasons, i.e., in autumn, spring, and summer. Using classical taxonomy, 107 taxa/morphotypes were identified in the nine communities. The individual-based functional approach allowed grouping these individuals into 20 functional entities according to their values for 5 traits related to trophic adaptations (cell size, mobility, trophic regime, coloniality, and pelagic/benthic life). Some species (e.g., Prorocentrum micans) emerged in multiple functional entities, showing the importance to consider intraspecific variability. The functional description of phytoplankton communities better reflected the hydrological functioning and the different eutrophication status of the lagoons than the taxonomic approach. Specific functional adaptations were identified in the nine communities. For example, phytoplankton organisms with heterotrophic and potentially mixotrophic abilities occurred when the availability of inorganic nutrient decreased, or when organic matter and small preys were potentially the main nutrient resources. The limitation has also favored small cells highly competitive for nutrients. Using functional indices together with taxonomic description has also helped revealing important aspects of community assembly, such as competitive exclusion in summer.
RI Villeger, Sebastien/C-6272-2011
OI Villeger, Sebastien/0000-0002-2362-7178; Malet,
   Nathalie/0000-0003-1922-527X
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0018-8158
EI 1573-5117
PD JUN
PY 2018
VL 815
IS 1
BP 207
EP 227
DI 10.1007/s10750-018-3565-4
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000428815800015
ER

PT J
AU Acevedo-Trejos, E
   Maranon, E
   Merico, A
AF Acevedo-Trejos, Esteban
   Maranon, Emilio
   Merico, Agostino
TI Phytoplankton size diversity and ecosystem function relationships across
   oceanic regions
SO PROCEEDINGS OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY B-BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES
DT Article
DE functional biogeography; trait-based ecology; macroecology; biodiversity
   ecosystem function relationship; latitudinal gradient; environmentally
   mediated trade-off
ID SPECIES RICHNESS; CELL-SIZE; PRODUCTIVITY RELATIONSHIP; COMMUNITY
   ECOLOGY; BOTTOM-UP; TOP-DOWN; MODEL; MARINE; TRAIT; BIODIVERSITY
AB Trait diversity, a key component of biodiversity, mediates many essential ecosystem functions and services. However, the mechanisms behind such relationships at large spatial scales are not fully understood. Here we adopt the functional biogeography approach to investigate how the size composition of phytoplankton communities relates to primary production and export production along a broad latitudinal gradient. Using in situ phytoplankton size distribution data and a trait-based model, we find an increase in the average phytoplankton size, size diversity, primary production and export when moving from low to high latitudes. Our analysis indicates that the interplay between spatio-temporal heterogeneities in environmental conditions and a trade-off between the high affinity for nutrients of smaller cells and the ability to avoid predation by larger cells are the main mechanisms driving the observed patterns. Our results also suggest that variations in size diversity alone do not directly lead to changes in primary production and export. The trade-off thus introduces a feedback that influences the relationship between size diversity and ecosystem functions. These findings support the importance of environmentally mediated trade-offs as crucial mechanisms shaping biodiversity and ecosystem function relationships at large spatial scales.
RI Maranon, Emilio/F-3013-2013
OI Maranon, Emilio/0000-0003-1572-2121; Merico,
   Agostino/0000-0001-8095-8056; Acevedo-Trejos,
   Esteban/0000-0003-4222-7062
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0962-8452
EI 1471-2954
PD MAY 30
PY 2018
VL 285
IS 1879
AR 20180621
DI 10.1098/rspb.2018.0621
SC Life Sciences & Biomedicine - Other Topics; Environmental Sciences &
   Ecology; Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000433506100022
PM 29794050
ER

PT J
AU Otero, J
   Bode, A
   Alvarez-Salgado, XA
   Varela, M
AF Otero, Jaime
   Bode, Antonio
   Anton Alvarez-Salgado, Xose
   Varela, Manuel
TI Role of functional trait variability in the response of individual
   phytoplankton species to changing environmental conditions in a coastal
   upwelling zone
SO MARINE ECOLOGY PROGRESS SERIES
DT Article
DE Phytoplankton; Cell size; Functional traits; Sea suiface tempeiature;
   Nutnents; Upwellmg; NW Iberian margin
ID MARINE PRIMARY PRODUCTION; CELL-SIZE; COMMUNITY STRUCTURE;
   NORTH-ATLANTIC; NW SPAIN; SEASONAL DYNAMICS; NUTRIENT-UPTAKE; TRADE-OFF;
   PATTERNS; ABUNDANCE
AB The dynamics of individual phytoplankton species are often more variable than predicted for their functional groups. This observation is poorly understood in highly perturbed coastal systems. Trends in the abundance of 54 phytoplankton species spanning a volumetric size range from similar to 10(2) to similar to 10(5) mu m(3) in shelf waters of the NW Iberian upwelling system since the late 1980s were modelled as a function of environmental variables. Functional traits were assessed for their ability to explain the a cross-species changes in occurrence and abundance due to the environmental drivers. Species-specific responses to the environment were heterogeneous, precluding any generalisation by taxonomic groups, although these responses were partially related to cell size. Smaller species showed a high probability of occurrence and higher abundance under high nitrate concentration in the euphotic layer, pointing to a major role of the upwelling of Eastern North Atlantic Central Water but also to inputs of nutrients mineralised over the shelf. However, cell size explained only a small amount of the variability in the individual species' responses to the environment. Growth rate and maximum rate of nitrogen uptake normalised to cell size provided additional explanation for the individual species' responses to the environmental drivers. Fast-growing species, though less efficient in taking up upwelled nutrients, thrived in favourable upwelling conditions. These results support the dominance of species of intermediate size during blooms in this upwelling region, and suggest that variability in functional traits among species rather than cell size alone affects the response of phytoplankton to environmental changes in upwelling ecosystems.
RI Alvarez-Salgado, Xose Anton/A-8365-2012; Otero, Jaime/C-4848-2015
OI Alvarez-Salgado, Xose Anton/0000-0002-2387-9201; Otero,
   Jaime/0000-0001-8020-0157
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0171-8630
EI 1616-1599
PD MAY 28
PY 2018
VL 596
BP 33
EP 47
DI 10.3354/meps12542
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology;
   Oceanography
UT WOS:000434051700003
ER

PT J
AU Cuevas, N
   Martins, M
   Rodrigo, AP
   Martins, C
   Costa, PM
AF Cuevas, N.
   Martins, M.
   Rodrigo, A. P.
   Martins, C.
   Costa, P. M.
TI Explorations on the ecological role of toxin secretion and delivery in
   jawless predatory Polychaeta
SO SCIENTIFIC REPORTS
DT Article
ID HISTOPATHOLOGICAL INDEXES; FUNCTIONAL-MORPHOLOGY; EULALIA-VIRIDIS; VENOM
   GLANDS; MARINE; TRANSCRIPTOMICS; GLYCEROTOXIN; NEUROTOXIN; PURIFICATION;
   NEREISTOXIN
AB Motivated by biotechnological prospects, there is increasing evidence that we may just be scraping the tip of the iceberg of poisonous marine invertebrates, among which the Polychaeta are promising candidates for bioprospecting. Here we show that an inconspicuous phyllodocid uses toxins in its uncanny feeding strategy. The worm, a jawless active predator characterised by its bright green colour, preys on larger invertebrates (including conspecifics) by extracting tissue portions with its powerful proboscis through suction. The animal is even able to penetrate through the valves and plates of live molluscs and barnacles. Observations in situ and a series of experiments demonstrated that the worm compensates its simple anatomy with secretion of a novel toxin, or mixture of toxins, referred to by us as "phyllotoxins". These are carried by mucus and delivered via repeated contact with the tip of the proboscis until the prey is relaxed or immobilised (reversibly). Proteolytic action permeabilises material to toxins and softens tissue to enable extraction by suction. The findings show that toxins are a major ecological trait and therefore play a key role in evolutionary success and diversification of Polychaeta, demonstrating also that understanding adaptative features may become the best showcase for novel animal toxins.
RI Costa, Pedro/J-2962-2013
OI Costa, Pedro/0000-0002-9072-3522; Alves Martins, Carla
   Maria/0000-0003-3182-884X; Rodrigo, Ana P./0000-0001-9310-4447
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 2045-2322
PD MAY 16
PY 2018
VL 8
AR 7635
DI 10.1038/s41598-018-26031-1
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000432271700002
PM 29769587
ER

PT J
AU Mestdagh, S
   Bagaco, L
   Braeckman, U
   Ysebaert, T
   De Smet, B
   Moens, T
   Van Colen, C
AF Mestdagh, Sebastiaan
   Bagaco, Leila
   Braeckman, Ulrike
   Ysebaert, Tom
   De Smet, Bart
   Moens, Tom
   Van Colen, Carl
TI Functional trait responses to sediment deposition reduce
   macrofauna-mediated ecosystem functioning in an estuarine mudflat
SO BIOGEOSCIENCES
DT Article
ID MACROBENTHIC RECOVERY; NEREIS-DIVERSICOLOR; MARINE-SEDIMENTS; TIDAL
   FLAT; BIODIVERSITY; COMMUNITIES; SANDFLATS; ORGANISMS; HABITATS;
   NUTRIENT
AB Human activities, among which dredging and land use change in river basins, are altering estuarine ecosystems. These activities may result in changes in sedimentary processes, affecting biodiversity of sediment macrofauna. As macrofauna controls sediment chemistry and fluxes of energy and matter between water column and sediment, changes in the structure of macrobenthic communities could affect the functioning of an entire ecosystem. We assessed the impact of sediment deposition on intertidal macrobenthic communities and on rates of an important ecosystem function, i.e. sediment community oxygen consumption (SCOC). An experiment was performed with undisturbed sediment samples from the Scheldt river estuary (SW Netherlands). The samples were subjected to four sedimentation regimes: one control and three with a deposited sediment layer of 1, 2 or 5 cm. Oxygen consumption was measured during incubation at ambient temperature. Luminophores applied at the surface, and a seawater-bromide mixture, served as tracers for bioturbation and bio-irrigation, respectively. After incubation, the macrofauna was extracted, identified, and counted and then classified into functional groups based on motility and sediment reworking capacity. Total macrofaunal densities dropped already under the thinnest deposits. The most affected fauna were surficial and low-motility animals, occurring at high densities in the control. Their mortality resulted in a drop in SCOC, which decreased steadily with increasing deposit thickness, while bio-irrigation and bioturbation activity showed increases in the lower sediment deposition regimes but decreases in the more extreme treatments. The initial increased activity likely counteracted the effects of the drop in low-motility, surficial fauna densities, resulting in a steady rather than sudden fall in oxygen consumption. We conclude that the functional identity in terms of motility and sediment reworking can be crucial in our understanding of the regulation of ecosystem functioning and the impact of habitat alterations such as sediment deposition.
OI Braeckman, Ulrike/0000-0002-7558-6363
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1726-4170
EI 1726-4189
PD MAY 4
PY 2018
VL 15
IS 9
BP 2587
EP 2599
DI 10.5194/bg-15-2587-2018
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Geology
UT WOS:000431435900001
ER

PT J
AU Balik, JA
   Taylor, BW
   Washko, SE
   Wissinger, SA
AF Balik, Jared A.
   Taylor, Brad W.
   Washko, Susan E.
   Wissinger, Scott A.
TI High interspecific variation in nutrient excretion within a guild of
   closely related caddisfly species
SO ECOSPHERE
DT Article
DE caddisflies; climate change; consumer-driven nutrient regeneration;
   ecological redundancy; ecological stoichiometry; excretion; functional
   traits; guilds; macroinvertebrates; trait-based variation; wetlands
ID FRESH-WATER ECOSYSTEMS; DETRITIVOROUS CADDISFLIES; NP STOICHIOMETRY;
   TROPICAL STREAM; LIFE-HISTORIES; FISH EXCRETION; LEAF-LITTER;
   BIODIVERSITY; PHOSPHORUS; COMMUNITY
AB Understanding the amount of variation in functional traits between closely related species within guilds is critical for understanding links between community composition and ecosystem processes. Nutrient excretion is an important link between animals and their environments, and aquatic invertebrate communities can supply a considerable proportion of ecosystem nutrient demand via excretion. We quantified nitrogen (N) and phosphorus (P) excretion rates of 10 species of larval caddisflies that inhabit high-elevation ponds and wetlands to determine the magnitude of variation in nutrient excretion within this guild. We found considerable interspecific variation in biomass-specific excretion of nitrogen (eightfold differences), phosphorus (sevenfold differences), and the stoichiometric N:P ratios (fivefold differences). Through a meta-analysis, we compared the variation within this guild to the variation found in other family-level species assemblages to determine the overall range in the variation of nutrient excretion that could be expected across guilds and to determine whether the variation in this caddisfly guild is comparatively extreme, average, or low. The meta-analysis revealed a large range in variation among guilds, and comparatively, the variation within this caddisfly guild is high for N excretion and intermediate for P excretion. The considerable variation within guilds revealed by our meta-analysis suggests that functional redundancy among guild members is difficult to predict. Thus, some natural or human-caused species gains or losses within biological groupings such as guilds and trophic levels could have little or no effect on ecosystem processes, whereas others could have very large effects.
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 2150-8925
PD MAY
PY 2018
VL 9
IS 5
AR e02205
DI 10.1002/ecs2.2205
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000435640100006
ER

PT J
AU Caillon, F
   Bonhomme, V
   Mollmann, C
   Frelat, R
AF Caillon, Florian
   Bonhomme, Vincent
   Moellmann, Christian
   Frelat, Romain
TI A morphometric dive into fish diversity
SO ECOSPHERE
DT Article
DE elliptical Fourier transform; fish diversity; morphological traits;
   North Sea; outline analysis
ID FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; BODY SHAPE; COMMUNITY ECOLOGY; SPECIES COMPLEX;
   CICHLID FISHES; NORTH-SEA; BIOGEOGRAPHY; POPULATIONS; MORPHOLOGY;
   EVOLUTION
AB Trait-based approaches are increasingly popular in ecology to describe communities and their responses to natural or anthropogenic changes. Morphology is an integrative trait that combines functional and evolutionary information. However, the objective and quantitative description of the morphological diversity is quite challenging. Modern morphometrics encompass an array of mathematical approaches that turn shapes into quantitative variables. For models with no or only a few homologous points, outline analysis (e.g., elliptical Fourier transform) converts the outline geometry into quantitative variables, which can be used in the multivariate framework. The elliptical Fourier transform here describes the shape of 85 fish species found in the North Sea. This study shows that the main component of morphological diversity in the North sea is the elongation and development of dorsal, pelvic, and caudal fins. The spatial distribution of morphological diversity decreases along a latitudinal gradient, with higher diversity in the southern part of the study area. Compared to species diversity, our results indicate that environmental conditions filter morphological traits in the northern North Sea. Outline analysis is a powerful approach to provide an objective description of fish morphology and to improve our understanding of the diversity of large marine ecosystems. \
RI Mollmann, Christian/C-4788-2011
OI Mollmann, Christian/0000-0001-9161-6342; Frelat,
   Romain/0000-0002-8631-4398; Vincent, Bonhomme/0000-0002-2742-6349
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 2150-8925
PD MAY
PY 2018
VL 9
IS 5
AR e02220
DI 10.1002/ecs2.2220
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000435640100017
ER

PT J
AU Cornwell, LE
   Findlay, HS
   Fileman, ES
   Smyth, TJ
   Hirst, AG
   Bruun, JT
   Mcevoy, AJ
   Widdicombe, CE
   Castellani, C
   Lewis, C
   Atkinson, A
AF Cornwell, L. E.
   Findlay, H. S.
   Fileman, E. S.
   Smyth, T. J.
   Hirst, A. G.
   Bruun, J. T.
   Mcevoy, A. J.
   Widdicombe, C. E.
   Castellani, C.
   Lewis, C.
   Atkinson, A.
TI Seasonality of Oithona similis and Calanus helgolandicus reproduction
   and abundance: contrasting responses to environmental variation at a
   shelf site
SO JOURNAL OF PLANKTON RESEARCH
DT Article
DE functional trait; egg production rate; Oithona similis; Calanus
   helgolandicus; Western Channel Observatory
ID WESTERN ENGLISH-CHANNEL; MARINE PLANKTONIC COPEPODS; EGG-PRODUCTION;
   COASTAL WATERS; CHLOROPHYLL-A; GLOBAL RATES; TIME-SERIES; STATION L4;
   TEMPORAL VARIABILITY; FUNCTIONAL TRAITS
AB The pelagic copepods Oithona similis and Calanus helgolandicus have overlapping geographic ranges, yet contrast in feeding mode, reproductive strategy and body size. We investigate how these contrasting traits influence the seasonality of copepod abundance and reproductive output under environmental variation, using time series data collected over 25 years at the Western Channel Observatory station, L4. The proportional change in egg production rate (EPR, eggs female(-1) d(-1)) over the annual cycle was similar to 10-fold and similar for both species, although EPR of O. similis was only similar to 11% that of C. helgolandicus. The timing of EPR maxima for O. similis coincided with increased sea surface temperature (SST) in summer, likely due to a temperature-dependent brooding period. Conversely, EPR of broadcast spawning C. helgolandicus was more strongly related to net heat flux and diatom biomass, both parameters associated with the spring phytoplankton bloom. In both species, female body mass correlated negatively with SST, with a 7.5% reduction in body mass per degrees C in C. helgolandicus compared to just 2.3% in O. similis. Finally, seasonality of EPR and adult and copepodite abundance was strongly decoupled in both species, suggesting that optimum conditions for reproduction and abundance occurred at different times of the year.
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0142-7873
EI 1464-3774
PD MAY-JUN
PY 2018
VL 40
IS 3
BP 295
EP 310
DI 10.1093/plankt/fby007
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000434086700008
ER

PT J
AU Zhang, Y
   Li, J
   Cheng, XH
   Luo, YF
   Mai, ZM
   Zhang, S
AF Zhang, Yi
   Li, Jie
   Cheng, Xuhua
   Luo, Yinfeng
   Mai, Zhimao
   Zhang, Si
TI Community differentiation of bacterioplankton in the epipelagic layer in
   the South China Sea
SO ECOLOGY AND EVOLUTION
DT Article
DE bacterioplankton community; epipelagic layer; functional traits;
   longitudinal distribution; pyrosequencing; stratification distribution
ID CYCLONIC EDDY PERTURBATIONS; NORTHWESTERN SARGASSO SEA; BACTERIAL
   COMMUNITIES; MICROBIAL COMMUNITIES; MESOSCALE EDDIES; MARINE-BACTERIA;
   TIME-SERIES; ARABIAN SEA; DIVERSITY; DYNAMICS
AB The South China Sea (SCS) is the largest marginal sea in the western tropical Pacific Ocean and is characterized by complex physicochemical environments. To date, the biogeographic patterns of the microbial communities have rarely been reported at a basin scale in the SCS. In this study, the bacterial assemblages inhabiting the epipelagic zone across 110 degrees E to 119 degrees E along 14 degrees N latitude were uncovered. The vertical stratification of both bacterial taxa and their potential functions were revealed. These results suggest that the water depth-specific environment is a driver of the vertical bacterioplankton distribution. Moreover, the bacterial communities were different between the eastern stations and the western stations, where the environmental conditions were distinct. However, the mesoscale eddy did not show an obvious effect on the bacterial community due to the large distance between the sampling site and the center of the eddy. In addition to the water depth and longitudinal location of the samples, the heterogeneity of the phosphate and salinity concentrations also significantly contributed to the variance in the epipelagic bacterial community in the SCS. To the best of our knowledge, this study is the first to report that the variability in epipelagic bacterioplankton is driven by the physicochemical environment at the basin scale in the SCS. Our results emphasize that the ecological significance of bacterioplankton can be better understood by considering the relationship between the biogeographic distribution of bacteria and the oceanic dynamics processes.
RI Cheng, Xuhua/B-7086-2012
OI Cheng, Xuhua/0000-0002-3055-9775
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 2045-7758
PD MAY
PY 2018
VL 8
IS 10
BP 4932
EP 4948
DI 10.1002/ece3.4064
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000434093100019
PM 29876071
ER

PT J
AU Kenny, AJ
   Jenkins, C
   Wood, D
   Bolam, SG
   Mitchell, P
   Scougal, C
   Judd, A
AF Kenny, Andrew J.
   Jenkins, Chris
   Wood, Daniel
   Bolam, Stefan G.
   Mitchell, Peter
   Scougal, Callum
   Judd, Adrian
TI Assessing cumulative human activities, pressures, and impacts on North
   Sea benthic habitats using a biological traits approach
SO ICES JOURNAL OF MARINE SCIENCE
DT Article
DE benthos; biological traits; cumulative impacts; disposal; dredging;
   extraction; fishing; habitat; human activities; North Sea; pressures;
   seabed; sensitivity; sustainable blue growth
ID DREDGED MATERIAL DISPOSAL; MARINE GRAVEL EXTRACTION; TRAWLING
   DISTURBANCE; SECONDARY PRODUCTION; COMMUNITIES; MACROBENTHOS;
   ASSEMBLAGES; ECOSYSTEMS; BIOMASS
AB The application of a biological traits analysis, in the present study, has allowed benthic habitat sensitivities and their risk of impact to be mapped at a spatial scale appropriate for the assessment of the North Sea ecoregion. This study considered habitat impacts associated with five important marine sectors; bottom fishing, marine aggregate dredging, sediment disposal, renewable energy devices (tidal, waves, and wind) and the oil and gas sectors, both individually and cumulatively. The significance of the "actual" footprint of impact arising from these human activities and their associated pressures (sediment abrasion, sediment removal, smothering, and placement of hard structures) is presented and discussed. Notable differences in sensitivity to activities are seen depending on habitat type. Some of the more substantial changes in benthic habitat function evaluated are potentially associated with the placement of hard structures in shallow mobile sedimentary habitats, which result in a shift in habitat dominated by small, short-living infaunal species, to a habitat dominated by larger, longer-lived, sessile epibenthic suspension feeders. In contrast, the impacts of bottom fishing, dredging and disposal activities are all assessed to be most severe when executed in deep, sedimentary habitats. Such assessments are important in supporting policies (e. g. spatial planning) directed towards ensuring sustainable " blue-growth," through a better understanding of the potential ecological impacts associated with human activities operating across different habitat types. The aim of this study is to provide a better understanding of the spatial extent of selected human activities and their impacts on seabed habitats using a biological trait-based sensitivity analysis.
TC 5
Z9 5
SN 1054-3139
EI 1095-9289
PD MAY-JUN
PY 2018
VL 75
IS 3
BP 1080
EP 1092
DI 10.1093/icesjms/fsx205
SC Fisheries; Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000434070900018
ER

PT J
AU Meng, A
   Corre, E
   Probert, I
   Gutierrez-Rodriguez, A
   Siano, R
   Annamale, A
   Alberti, A
   Da Silva, C
   Wincker, P
   Le Crom, S
   Not, F
   Bittner, L
AF Meng, Arnaud
   Corre, Erwan
   Probert, Ian
   Gutierrez-Rodriguez, Andres
   Siano, Raffaele
   Annamale, Anita
   Alberti, Adriana
   Da Silva, Corinne
   Wincker, Patrick
   Le Crom, Stephane
   Not, Fabrice
   Bittner, Lucie
TI Analysis of the genomic basis of functional diversity in dinoflagellates
   using a transcriptome-based sequence similarity network
SO MOLECULAR ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE genomics; proteomics; microbial biology; molecular evolution; protists;
   transcriptomics
ID GENE-EXPRESSION; POLYCYSTINE RADIOLARIANS; SAXITOXIN BIOSYNTHESIS;
   POLYKETIDE SYNTHASES; SP-NOV; MARINE; EVOLUTION; DINOPHYCEAE; SYMBIOSIS;
   CLASSIFICATION
AB Dinoflagellates are one of the most abundant and functionally diverse groups of eukaryotes. Despite an overall scarcity of genomic information for dinoflagellates, constantly emerging high-throughput sequencing resources can be used to characterize and compare these organisms. We assembled de novo and processed 46 dinoflagellate transcriptomes and used a sequence similarity network (SSN) to compare the underlying genomic basis of functional features within the group. This approach constitutes the most comprehensive picture to date of the genomic potential of dinoflagellates. A core-predicted proteome composed of 252 connected components (CCs) of putative conserved protein domains (pCDs) was identified. Of these, 206 were novel and 16 lacked any functional annotation in public databases. Integration of functional information in our network analyses allowed investigation of pCDs specifically associated with functional traits. With respect to toxicity, sequences homologous to those of proteins found in species with toxicity potential (e.g., sxtA4 and sxtG) were not specific to known toxin-producing species. Although not fully specific to symbiosis, the most represented functions associated with proteins involved in the symbiotic trait were related to membrane processes and ion transport. Overall, our SSN approach led to identification of 45,207 and 90,794 specific and constitutive pCDs of, respectively, the toxic and symbiotic species represented in our analyses. Of these, 56% and 57%, respectively (i.e., 25,393 and 52,193 pCDs), completely lacked annotation in public databases. This stresses the extent of our lack of knowledge, while emphasizing the potential of SSNs to identify candidate pCDs for further functional genomic characterization.
OI Gutierrez-Rodriguez, Andres/0000-0003-1274-3752; Meng,
   Arnaud/0000-0002-0377-5077; Bittner, Lucie/0000-0001-8291-7063
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 0962-1083
EI 1365-294X
PD MAY
PY 2018
VL 27
IS 10
BP 2365
EP 2380
DI 10.1111/mec.14579
SC Biochemistry & Molecular Biology; Environmental Sciences & Ecology;
   Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000433589000004
PM 29624751
ER

PT J
AU Khatikarn, J
   Satapornvanit, K
   Price, OR
   Van den Brink, PJ
AF Khatikarn, Jidapa
   Satapornvanit, Kriengkrai
   Price, Oliver R.
   Van den Brink, Paul J.
TI Effects of triclosan on aquatic invertebrates in tropics and the
   influence of pH on its toxicity on microalgae
SO ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE AND POLLUTION RESEARCH
DT Article
DE Antimicrobial; Triclosan; Acute toxicity; Aquatic; Invertebrates; pH;
   Tropics
ID PERSONAL CARE PRODUCTS; SPECIES SENSITIVITY DISTRIBUTIONS; FRESH-WATER
   ARTHROPODS; INTRINSIC SENSITIVITY; BIOLOGICAL TRAITS; ORYZIAS-LATIPES;
   RISK-ASSESSMENT; SOUTH CHINA; BIOACCUMULATION; CHLORPYRIFOS
AB The antimicrobial triclosan (TCS) has been detected in household wastewaters (untreated and treated) and receiving environments across the globe. The toxic effects of TCS on temperate standard aquatic test organisms have been widely reported with microalgae being the most sensitive. However, environmental differences between tropical and temperate regions may have selected different trait compositions between these two regions, which in turn may lead to a difference in species sensitivity. Therefore, additional information is required to better characterize risks to organisms in tropics and ensure biodiversity in these regions is not adversely impacted. This study aims to supplement existing TCS toxicity data with five aquatic invertebrates found in tropics and to compare the sensitivity between aquatic invertebrate species from tropical and temperate regions. In addition, the effect of pH on the toxicity of neutral and ionized forms of TCS to microalgae (Chlorella ellipsoidea) was investigated. The reported 96-h LC50 values for the studied invertebrate species ranged from 72 to 962 mu g/L. There was no significant difference between the sensitivity of aquatic invertebrate species from tropical and temperate regions. EC50 values for C. ellipsoidea, with and without pH buffer, were significantly different. The findings of this study can be used to support site-specific water quality criteria and environmental risk assessment for TCS in tropical regions. However, further chronic and semi-field experiments with TCS could potentially enable a refined assessment of direct and indirect effects on tropical aquatic communities and further explore functional endpoints of tropical ecosystems.
OI van den brink, Paul/0000-0002-7241-4347
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 0944-1344
EI 1614-7499
PD MAY
PY 2018
VL 25
IS 14
SI SI
BP 13244
EP 13253
DI 10.1007/s11356-016-7302-0
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000433038500006
PM 27543130
ER

PT J
AU Martinez, M
   Mangano, MC
   Maricchiolo, G
   Genovese, L
   Mazzola, A
   Sara, G
AF Martinez, Marco
   Mangano, M. Cristina
   Maricchiolo, Giulia
   Genovese, Lucrezia
   Mazzola, Antonio
   Sara, Gianluca
TI Measuring the effects of temperature rise on Mediterranean shellfish
   aquaculture
SO ECOLOGICAL INDICATORS
DT Article
DE Thickness; Body Condition; Temperature increase; Climate change;
   Shellfish; Aquaculture
ID OCEAN ACIDIFICATION; MYTILUS-EDULIS; ECOLOGICAL IMPLICATIONS; FUNCTIONAL
   TRAITS; INTERTIDAL SNAIL; CLIMATE-CHANGE; SEA; MUSSEL; THICKNESS; GROWTH
AB Shellfish aquaculture represents a worldwide valuable segment of the aquaculture market, spreading along the Mediterranean coasts, and is sensitive to the still unforeseen, poorly-known effects of climate change. Threats due to temperature rise can threaten the deployment and development of this sector, up until now recognised as the best candidate to mitigate the effects of fishery overexploitation. Here, we investigate the effects of temperature increase on the model species, Mytilus galloprovincialis, measuring outcomes from valve fragility (thickness) and condition index. Evidence of a reduction in the thickness of valves and the modulation condition of the mussels along with temperature increase have been gathered from simulations of a natural temperature gradient changing along latitude (the Italian Peninsula) and temperature risen (mesocosm trial). The obtained results offer a baseline to help the next generation of managers and stakeholders when assessing the reliability and feasibility of shellfish culture in a changing sea that can generate undetected and underestimated impacts on the sector.
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 1470-160X
EI 1872-7034
PD MAY
PY 2018
VL 88
BP 71
EP 78
DI 10.1016/j.ecolind.2018.01.002
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000430760800009
ER

PT J
AU Parker, J
   Cao, Y
   Sass, GG
   Epifanio, J
AF Parker, Jerrod
   Cao, Yong
   Sass, Greg G.
   Epifanio, John
TI Large river fish functional diversity responses to improved water
   quality over a 28 year period
SO ECOLOGICAL INDICATORS
DT Article
DE Biodiversity; Detection; Functional diversity; Invasive; Pollution;
   River recovery
ID ILLINOIS RIVER; SPECIES RICHNESS; BIOTIC INTEGRITY; TRAIT DIVERSITY;
   RANDOM FORESTS; COMMUNITIES; INDEXES; ASSEMBLAGES; PATTERNS; FRAMEWORK
AB The enactment of environmental legislation and subsequent improvements in wastewater treatment during the late 20th century resulted in improved water quality for many large rivers in developed countries. Yet, little is known about how these improvements affected the functional diversity of aquatic assemblages, or of its relationship with species diversity during recovery. We examined species richness (SR), functional dispersion (FDis), and functional evenness (FEve) changes in four reaches of the Illinois River, USA, during a recovery period (1983-2010). The functional indices were based on fish habitat and foraging traits and weighted with either abundance or biomass. Though most correlations of the indices with SR were weak, additional species tended to increase FDis and decrease FEve. Biomass-weighted functional dispersion (FDis(w)) and SR consistently increased during the recovery, while the responses of FEve and abundance weighted FDis were much more variable. FDis(w) was better explained by improvements in water quality in all but the least impacted reach, where SR was best explained. Un-ionized ammonia, phosphorus, phenols, and water clarity were among the most important predictors of biodiversity changes. Increases in habitat and foraging specialized species appeared to contribute equally to functional changes in the three more degraded reaches, whereas increases in habitat specialization had a greater impact on FDis(w) changes in the least impacted reach. Later stage recovery of habitat specialist fishes in the absence of major habitat alterations indicates habitat improvement projects should be undertaken following water quality remediation. Functional diversity and species richness are complementary and both should be assessed to detect the responses of fish assemblages to environmental alterations. Biomass may better reflect functional changes in response to disturbance than abundance and should be assessed when estimating functional diversity.
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 1470-160X
EI 1872-7034
PD MAY
PY 2018
VL 88
BP 322
EP 331
DI 10.1016/j.ecolind.2018.01.035
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000430760800033
ER

PT J
AU de Juan, S
   Subida, MD
   Gelcich, S
   Fernandez, M
AF de Juan, Silvia
   Dulce Subida, Maria
   Gelcich, Stefan
   Fernandez, Miriam
TI Ecosystem health in coastal areas targeted by small-scale artisanal
   fisheries: Insights on monitoring and assessment
SO ECOLOGICAL INDICATORS
DT Article
DE Benthic communities; Biological Traits Analysis; Ecosystem indicators;
   Fishing impacts; Kelp forests
ID TERRITORIAL USER RIGHTS; FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; MARINE ECOSYSTEM;
   BIOLOGICAL TRAITS; NORTHERN CHILE; KELP; COMMUNITY; CONSERVATION;
   ASSEMBLAGES; MANAGEMENT
AB The assessment of the status of marine ecosystems is still a major challenge, because in general we lack well established ecosystem-based monitoring programs. The coast of central Chile is subjected to moderate but historic fishing pressure by small-scale fisheries. In spite of the increasing evidences of the impact of fishing. beyond target species, there is a lack of systematic ecosystem-based assessments. We focused on this problem with the goal of identifying community components, based on a Biological Traits Analysis, that respond to fishing activities to ultimately define ecosystem health. We sampled a set of study sites subjected to benthic invertebrate gathering, and more recently to kelp harvesting. Sites included paired fishery restricted and open access areas where mobile invertebrates and sessile benthos were surveyed. In addition, kelp density and size structure were assessed in two sites subjected to kelp harvesting (also pairing restricted and open access areas). Target species exhibited higher densities in fishery-restricted areas. Fisheries restricted-areas also showed overall higher richness and redundancy of biological traits. Otherwise, we observed high variability in the structure of sessile benthos linked to small-scale heterogeneity of the seabed. The areas subjected to kelp harvesting exhibited variability in mobile invertebrates' composition between fishing access regimes, whereas no effects could be detected by only considering target species. Current monitoring efforts seem to be well-suited to address target species but fail to inform on ecosystem health in an area with increasing signs of community-wide effects from fishing. Therefore, we recommend future monitoring schemes targeting community components, beyond commercial species' densities, at different scales.
OI Subida, Maria Dulce/0000-0003-0205-8276
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 1470-160X
EI 1872-7034
PD MAY
PY 2018
VL 88
BP 361
EP 371
DI 10.1016/j.ecolind.2018.01.054
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000430760800037
ER

PT J
AU Lacoste, E
   Piot, A
   Archambault, P
   McKindsey, CW
   Nozais, C
AF Lacoste, Elise
   Piot, Adeline
   Archambault, Philippe
   McKindsey, Christopher W.
   Nozais, Christian
TI Bioturbation activity of three macrofaunal species and the presence of
   meiofauna affect the abundance and composition of benthic bacterial
   communities
SO MARINE ENVIRONMENTAL RESEARCH
DT Article
DE Biodiversity; Benthic community; Bacteria abundance; High nucleic acid
   content; Meiofauna; Alitta virens; Mya arenaria; Limecola balthica
ID NUCLEIC-ACID CONTENT; MACOMA-BALTHICA COMMUNITY; FUNCTIONAL-GROUP
   APPROACH; SEDIMENT-WATER INTERFACE; NEREIS-VIRENS SARS;
   MARINE-SEDIMENTS; ECOSYSTEM FUNCTION; CURRENT KNOWLEDGE; FLOW-CYTOMETRY;
   REACTION-RATES
AB Given concerns of increasing rates of species extinctions, the relationship between biodiversity and ecosystem functioning has become a major research focus over the past two decades. Many studies have shown that biodiversity per se (e.g. species richness) or species-specific traits may be good predictors of changes in ecosystem function. Although numerous studies on this subject have focused on terrestrial systems, few have evaluated benthic marine systems. We used the Limecola balthica community as a model to test whether the number or identity of three well-studied macrofaunal species influence the sediment bacterial compartment, which drives important biogeochemical processes and influence ecosystem functioning. We also investigated the poorly known role of meiofauna in the interactions between macrofauna and bacteria. Eight combinations of 0-3 species were maintained in microcosms for 34 days in the presence or absence of meiofauna. The abundance and composition of the bacterial community, defined by the relative percentage of cells with a high (HNA) vs low (LNA) nucleic acid content, were measured. Species identity of macrofauna was a better indicator of changes in the microbial compartment than was species richness per se. In particular, the gallery-diffuser behaviour of the polychaete Alitta Wrens likely induced strong changes in sediment physical and geochemical properties with a major impact on the bacterial compartment. Moreover, the presence of meiofauna modulated the influence of macrofauna on bacterial communities. This study provides evidence that species identity provides greater explanatory power than species richness to predict changes in the bacterial compartment. We propose that multi compartment approaches to describe interactions amongst different size classes of organisms and their ecological roles should be further developed to improve our understanding of benthic ecosystem functioning.
OI Archambault, Philippe/0000-0001-5986-6149; Lacoste,
   Elise/0000-0001-5322-6191
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 0141-1136
EI 1879-0291
PD MAY
PY 2018
VL 136
BP 62
EP 70
DI 10.1016/j.marenvres.2018.02.024
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology;
   Toxicology
UT WOS:000430776400008
PM 29503107
ER

PT J
AU Soliveres, S
   Lehmann, A
   Boch, S
   Altermatt, F
   Carrara, F
   Crowther, TW
   Delgado-Baquerizo, M
   Kempel, A
   Maynard, DS
   Rillig, MC
   Singh, BK
   Trivedi, P
   Allan, E
AF Soliveres, Santiago
   Lehmann, Anika
   Boch, Steffen
   Altermatt, Florian
   Carrara, Francesco
   Crowther, Thomas W.
   Delgado-Baquerizo, Manuel
   Kempel, Anne
   Maynard, Daniel S.
   Rillig, Matthias C.
   Singh, Brajesh K.
   Trivedi, Pankaj
   Allan, Eric
TI Intransitive competition is common across five major taxonomic groups
   and is driven by productivity, competitive rank and functional traits
SO JOURNAL OF ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE bacteria; bryophytes; competition hierarchy; functional traits;
   protists; rock-paper-scissors; saprobic fungi; vascular plants
ID ROCK-PAPER-SCISSORS; SPECIES COEXISTENCE; PLANT-COMMUNITIES; SPATIAL
   COMPETITION; DIVERSITY; BIODIVERSITY; PROMOTES; TRANSITIVITY; NETWORKS;
   METACOMMUNITIES
AB Competition can be fully hierarchical or intransitive, and this degree of hierarchy is driven by multiple factors, including environmental conditions, the functional traits of the species involved or the topology of competition networks. Studies simultaneously analysing these drivers of competition hierarchy are rare. Additionally, organisms compete either directly or via interference competition for resources or space, within a local neighbourhood or across the habitat. Therefore, the drivers of competition could change accordingly and depend on the taxa studied. We performed the first multi-taxon study on pairwise competition across major taxonomic groups, including experiments with vascular plants, mosses, saprobic fungi, aquatic protists and soil bacteria. We evaluated how general is competition intransitivity from the pairwise competition matrix including all species and also for each possible three-species combination (triplets). We then examined which species were likely to engage in competitive loops and the effects of environmental conditions, competitive rank and functional traits on intransitive competition. We found some degree of competition intransitivity in all taxa studied, with 38% to 5% of triplets being intransitive. Variance in competitive rank between species and more fertile conditions strongly reduced intransitivity, with triplets composed of species differing widely in their competitive ranks much less likely to be intransitive. Including functional traits of the species involved more than doubled the variation explained compared to models including competitive rank only. Both trait means and variance within triplets affected the odds of them being intransitive. However, the traits responsible and the direction of trait effects varied widely between taxa, suggesting that traits can have a wide variety of effects on competition.Synthesis. We evaluated the drivers of competition across multiple taxa and showed that productivity and competitive rank are fundamental drivers of intransitivity. We also showed that not only the functional traits of each species, but also those of the accompanying species, determine competition intransitivity. Intransitive competition is common across multiple taxa but can dampen under fertile conditions or for those species with large variance in their competitive abilities. This provides a first step towards predicting the prevalence of intransitive competition in natural communities.
OI Altermatt, Florian/0000-0002-4831-6958; Maynard,
   Daniel/0000-0003-0142-9100; Singh, Brajesh/0000-0003-4413-4185; Rillig,
   Matthias/0000-0003-3541-7853; DELGADO-BAQUERIZO,
   MANUEL/0000-0002-6499-576X
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0022-0477
EI 1365-2745
PD MAY
PY 2018
VL 106
IS 3
BP 852
EP 864
DI 10.1111/1365-2745.12959
SC Plant Sciences; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000430123800005
ER

PT J
AU Chapman, ASA
   Tunnicliffe, V
   Bates, AE
AF Chapman, Abbie S. A.
   Tunnicliffe, Verena
   Bates, Amanda E.
TI Both rare and common species make unique contributions to functional
   diversity in an ecosystem unaffected by human activities
SO DIVERSITY AND DISTRIBUTIONS
DT Article
DE biological trait; conservation; diversity; functional distinctiveness;
   human impact; hydrothermal vent; rarity; review; species richness;
   unique trait combination
ID DE-FUCA RIDGE; HYDROTHERMAL VENTS; NORTHEAST PACIFIC; COMMUNITY;
   EXTINCTION; FRAMEWORK; ECOLOGY; RARITY; COLONIZATION; BIODIVERSITY
AB AimRare species typically contribute more to functional diversity than common species. However, humans have altered the occupancy and abundance patterns of many speciesthe basis upon which we define rarity. Here, we use a globally unique dataset from hydrothermal ventsan untouched ecosystemto test whether rare species over-contribute to functional diversity.
   LocationJuan de Fuca Ridge hydrothermal vent fields, Northeast Pacific Ocean.
   MethodsWe first conduct a comprehensive review to set up expectations for the relative contributions of rare and common species to functional diversity. We then quantify the rarity and commonness of 37 vent species with relevant trait information to assess the relationship between rarity and functional distinctivenessa measure of the uniqueness of the traits of a species relative to traits of coexisting species. Next, we randomly assemble communities to test whether rare species over-contribute to functional diversity in artificial assemblages ranging in species richness. Then, we test whether biotic interactions influence functional diversity contributions by comparing the observed contribution of each species to a null expectation. Finally, we identify traits driving functional distinctiveness using a distance-based redundancy analysis.
   ResultsAcross functional diversity metrics and species richness levels, we find that both rare and common species can contribute functional uniqueness. Some species always offer unique trait combinations, and these species host bacterial symbionts and provide habitat complexity. Moreover, we find that contributions of species to functional diversity may be influenced by biotic interactions.
   Main conclusionsOur findings show that many common species make persistent, unique contributions to functional diversity. Thus, it is key to consider whether the abundance and occupancy of species have been reduced, relative to historical baselines, when interpreting the contributions of rare species to functional diversity. Our work highlights the importance of testing ecological theory in ecosystems unaffected by human activities for the conservation of biodiversity.
OI Chapman, Abbie/0000-0002-7812-2046
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 1366-9516
EI 1472-4642
PD MAY
PY 2018
VL 24
IS 5
BP 568
EP 578
DI 10.1111/ddi.12712
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000430103900001
ER

PT J
AU Zinke, J
   Gilmour, JP
   Fisher, R
   Puotinen, M
   Maina, J
   Darling, E
   Stat, M
   Richards, ZT
   McClanahan, TR
   Beger, M
   Moore, C
   Graham, NAJ
   Feng, M
   Hobbs, JPA
   Evans, SN
   Field, S
   Shedrawi, G
   Babcock, RC
   Wilson, SK
AF Zinke, Jens
   Gilmour, James P.
   Fisher, Rebecca
   Puotinen, Marji
   Maina, Joseph
   Darling, Emily
   Stat, Michael
   Richards, Zoe T.
   McClanahan, Timothy R.
   Beger, Maria
   Moore, Cordelia
   Graham, Nicholas A. J.
   Feng, Ming
   Hobbs, Jean-Paul A.
   Evans, Scott N.
   Field, Stuart
   Shedrawi, George
   Babcock, Russ C.
   Wilson, Shaun K.
TI Gradients of disturbance and environmental conditions shape coral
   community structure for south-eastern Indian Ocean reefs
SO DIVERSITY AND DISTRIBUTIONS
DT Article
DE biodiversity; coral bleaching; coral life-history traits; Indian Ocean;
   sea surface temperature; tropical cyclones
ID GREAT-BARRIER-REEF; NORTH-WESTERN AUSTRALIA; TROPICAL CYCLONE;
   CLIMATE-CHANGE; TEMPERATURE ANOMALIES; SEAWATER TEMPERATURE; RECOVERY
   PATTERNS; THERMAL-STRESS; FRINGING-REEF; TURBID WATERS
AB AimTo describe, model and assess the relative importance of environmental and climatic factors likely influencing the regional distribution of coral cover and assemblages with contrasting life histories and susceptibilities to bleaching.
   LocationWe compiled the first comprehensive empirical dataset for coral communities in the south-eastern Indian Ocean (SEIO), incorporating information from 392 sites along the western coast of Australia and offshore atolls/islands across 19 degrees of latitude.
   MethodsWe assessed hard coral cover and community composition to genus using point-intercept transects or point-count analysis of digital images taken along transects. We explored spatial variation in environmental conditions and in composition of corals with contrasting life histories. After de-trending the temporal patterns, we assessed the relative importance of environmental metrics to coral cover, life histories and bleaching susceptibility using a full subsets model-selection approach with generalized additive mixed models, accounting for both temporal and among site variation.
   ResultsThe distribution of temperature light, the frequency of temperature anomalies and tropical cyclones appear to be drivers of coral community structure. Functional diversity of low- to mid-latitude coral communities may convey some resilience to thermal stress, while higher latitude communities dominated by Competitive and Bleaching-Susceptible taxa may lack this functional resilience. These patterns likely reflect varying historical exposure to cyclones and temperature anomalies.
   Main conclusionsAs evident in recent years, changing background conditions and regimes of disturbance in coming decades will shift the distribution, functional diversity and resilience of coral reefs throughout the SEIO. The rate and magnitude of environmental change will ultimately determine the future of the tropical reefs and whether the higher latitude reefs provide some refuge from climate change. Our study highlights the need to quantify the distributional properties of key environmental metrics to better understand and predict reef condition through coming decades.
RI Graham, Nicholas/C-8360-2014; Zinke, Jens/G-5026-2011; Feng,
   Ming/F-5411-2010
OI Graham, Nicholas/0000-0002-0304-7467; Zinke, Jens/0000-0002-0634-8281;
   Feng, Ming/0000-0002-2855-7092; Maina, Joseph/0000-0003-1268-6137
TC 0
Z9 1
SN 1366-9516
EI 1472-4642
PD MAY
PY 2018
VL 24
IS 5
BP 605
EP 620
DI 10.1111/ddi.12714
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000430103900004
ER

PT J
AU Gansfort, B
   Traunspurger, W
   Threis, I
   Majdi, N
AF Gansfort, Birgit
   Traunspurger, Walter
   Threis, Ilka
   Majdi, Nabil
TI Wide variation in a tiny space: The microdistribution of meiobenthos in
   an artificial pond
SO FRESHWATER BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE rotifers; Moran's I; nematodes; patch sizes; small scale
ID LIVING MARINE NEMATODES; SCALE SPATIAL-PATTERNS; FRESH-WATER NEMATODES;
   VERTICAL-DISTRIBUTION; COMMUNITY STRUCTURE; MICROSCALE DISPERSION;
   BENTHIC COMMUNITY; OLIGOTROPHIC LAKE; FEEDING-TYPES; MEIOFAUNA
AB Meiofauna play an important ecological role in benthic ecosystems. However, little is known about their small-scale (<1m(2)) distribution. Yet, this knowledge has both theoretical implications, by improving our understanding of how processes generate patterns; and practical outcomes by improving sampling designs. The goal of this study was to obtain insights into the small-scale distribution of meiofaunal invertebrates dwelling in the sediment of a lentic ecosystem (in this study, an artificial pond). We addressed this aim at coarse and fine taxonomical levels using meiofaunal groups and nematode species assemblages, respectively. For this purpose, 225 sediment samples were collected over a surface of 729cm(2) using a straw corer. Spatial patterns (dispersion index) and the typical patch sizes of the dominant meiofaunal groups were estimated using spatial autocorrelation analysis (Moran's I). We hypothesized that (1) we would find a patchy distribution of organisms with patch radii of a few centimetres, (2) the distribution of microbivorous meiofauna would follow that of OM, and (3) distribution would be patchier at the species level. The densities of the dominant meiobenthic groups (nematodes, gastrotrichs and rotifers) decreased with sediment depth. In all sediment layers, nematodes contributed 61%-82% to total invertebrate densities. Eleven nematode species were identified, with Eumonhystera filiformis (Bastian 1865) and Monhystera cf. paludicola de Man 1881 dominating the assemblage. All meiofaunal groups showed an aggregated distribution pattern (dispersion index >1). Spatial autocorrelation analysis revealed aggregations of nematodes in a patch radius of 3-8cm according to the different sediment layers. Rotifers were also patchy distributed but with smaller patch radius (3cm), whereas the respective distributions of gastrotrichs were less patchy. Therefore, our results mainly confirmed hypothesis (1). Our results provide the first insights into rotifer patch sizes. Also, these findings highlight the need for sampling designs better able to capture small-scale heterogeneities during larger-scale investigations. We ruled out the organic matter (OM) supply as an important driver of meiofaunal community structure as OM content did not correlate with the density of either meiofaunal groups or nematode species, and therefore arguing against hypothesis (2). Instead, the different distributions suggested responses to qualitative differences in resource availability, oxygen availability, biotic interactions and specific population-level processes, such as behaviour, dispersal and locomotion. Patchiness did not increase from coarse to fine taxonomic levels, thus contradicting hypothesis (3). Our results instead suggest that the patchiness of the spatial distribution was more closely linked to functional traits.
OI Gansfort, Birgit/0000-0003-0384-0710
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0046-5070
EI 1365-2427
PD MAY
PY 2018
VL 63
IS 5
BP 420
EP 431
DI 10.1111/fwb.13078
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000428995400002
ER

PT J
AU Abonyi, A
   Acs, E
   Hidas, A
   Grigorszky, I
   Varbiro, G
   Borics, G
   Kiss, KT
AF Abonyi, Andras
   Acs, Eva
   Hidas, Andras
   Grigorszky, Istvan
   Varbiro, Gabor
   Borics, Gabor
   Kiss, Keve Tihamer
TI Functional diversity of phytoplankton highlights long-term gradual
   regime shift in the middle section of the Danube River due to global
   warming, human impacts and oligotrophication
SO FRESHWATER BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE climate change; Europe; large rivers; potamoplankton; trend analysis
ID LARGE EUTROPHIC RIVER; CLIMATE-CHANGE; COMMUNITY STRUCTURE; HUNGARIAN
   SECTION; WATER TEMPERATURE; NORTH-ATLANTIC; CENTRAL-EUROPE; LOWLAND
   RIVER; LOIRE FRANCE; LAKE
AB Long-term dynamics of phytoplankton have been addressed in marine and lake systems, but rarely in rivers. Large rivers, however, are highly human-impacted, whereas global warming may further affect the functioning of phytoplankton at long-term scale. In the middle section of the large European Danube River, long-term decrease in phytoplankton biomass (Chl-a) and increase in species diversity have formerly been revealed. The functional community composition that relates to ecosystem functioning directly has not been addressed previously. We analyse a 34-year-long phytoplankton data set from the middle river section at God (N-Budapest), Hungary. We focus on gradual changes in the functional composition and functional diversity components based on the functional trait and functional group approaches. We hypothesised that long-term gradual changes in major environmental constraints should be followed by gradual shifts in dominance relationships among functional traits and functional groups of phytoplankton. We further hypothesised that functional shifts were highlighted by gradual changes in functional diversity components: evenness, divergence and dispersion. Water discharge of the middle Danube shifted towards the more frequent occurrence of lower values. On the other hand, high floods (>3,000m(3)/s) increased significantly with shortening tendency in duration and altered seasonality. The concentration of N and P forms, as well as total suspended solids decreased significantly. Water temperature increased significantly, especially in summer. In the phytoplankton, single-celled eutrophic centric diatoms decreased in relative abundance, but flagellated, elongated and filamentous forms increased. A clear functional shift was the dominance decrease in planktonic taxa and the relative abundance increase in benthic diatoms. All functional diversity components increased significantly in the entire data set, except functional evenness (FEVE) based on the functional group approach. At seasonal scale, all significant trends showed increases, except the FEVE components of the functional group approach, which decreased in winter and spring significantly. Long-term increase in functional diversity components alone could indicate enhanced ecosystem functioning of phytoplankton in the middle section of the Danube. However, we argue that the observed increase in functional diversity may be related to a gradual shift from high-biomass communities with the dominance of eutrophic centric diatoms towards the relative increase in several, but low-biomass elements. These include a few planktonic algae well adapted to the altered conditions, diatoms with benthic origin and dispersed limnophilic taxa. Our results provide the first evidence for a long-term phytoplankton functional regime shift in a European large river. Global warming, human impacts and oligotrophication might potentially increase the functional diversity of large river phytoplankton, but the origin and functional role of taxa should carefully be considered. The observed functional shift in phytoplankton might also be indicative for alterations in the food-web structure of the middle section of the Danube River at long-term scale.
RI Abonyi, Andras/F-1849-2013
OI Abonyi, Andras/0000-0003-0593-5932
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 0046-5070
EI 1365-2427
PD MAY
PY 2018
VL 63
IS 5
BP 456
EP 472
DI 10.1111/fwb.13084
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000428995400005
ER

PT J
AU Alves, RJE
   Minh, BQ
   Urich, T
   von Haeseler, A
   Schleper, C
AF Alves, Ricardo J. Eloy
   Minh, Bui Quang
   Urich, Tim
   von Haeseler, Arndt
   Schleper, Christa
TI Unifying the global phylogeny and environmental distribution of
   ammonia-oxidising archaea based on amoA genes
SO NATURE COMMUNICATIONS
DT Article
ID MULTIPLE SEQUENCE ALIGNMENT; FUNCTION POSTERIOR PROBABILITIES;
   MAXIMUM-LIKELIHOOD PHYLOGENIES; MESOPHILIC CRENARCHAEOTA; MODEL
   SELECTION; NUCLEIC-ACIDS; OCEAN; OXIDATION; BACTERIA; TREE
AB Ammonia-oxidising archaea (AOA) are ubiquitous and abundant in nature and play a major role in nitrogen cycling. AOA have been studied intensively based on the amoA gene (encoding ammonia monooxygenase subunit A), making it the most sequenced functional marker gene. Here, based on extensive phylogenetic and meta-data analyses of 33,378 curated archaeal amoA sequences, we define a highly resolved taxonomy and uncover global environmental patterns that challenge many earlier generalisations. Particularly, we show: (i) the global frequency of AOA is extremely uneven, with few clades dominating AOA diversity in most ecosystems; (ii) characterised AOA do not represent most predominant clades in nature, including soils and oceans; (iii) the functional role of the most prevalent environmental AOA clade remains unclear; and (iv) AOA harbour molecular signatures that possibly reflect phenotypic traits. Our work synthesises information from a decade of research and provides the first integrative framework to study AOA in a global context.
RI Minh, Bui Quang/E-8899-2016
OI Minh, Bui Quang/0000-0002-5535-6560; Eloy Alves, Ricardo
   Jorge/0000-0002-7567-3205
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 2041-1723
PD APR 17
PY 2018
VL 9
AR 1517
DI 10.1038/s41467-018-03861-1
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000430196500002
PM 29666365
ER

PT J
AU Jourdan, J
   O'Hara, RB
   Bottarin, R
   Huttunen, KL
   Kuemmerlen, M
   Monteith, D
   Muotka, T
   Ozolins, D
   Paavola, R
   Pilotto, F
   Springe, G
   Skuja, A
   Sundermann, A
   Tonkin, JD
   Haase, P
AF Jourdan, Jonas
   O'Hara, Robert B.
   Bottarin, Roberta
   Huttunen, Kaisa-Leena
   Kuemmerlen, Mathias
   Monteith, Don
   Muotka, Timo
   Ozolins, Davis
   Paavola, Riku
   Pilotto, Francesca
   Springe, Gunta
   Skuja, Agnija
   Sundermann, Andrea
   Tonkin, Jonathan D.
   Haase, Peter
TI Effects of changing climate on European stream invertebrate communities:
   A long-term data analysis
SO SCIENCE OF THE TOTAL ENVIRONMENT
DT Article
DE Aquatic insects; Disturbances; Extreme events; Freshwater
   macroinvertebrates; Global change; Thermal tolerance
ID FRESH-WATER MACROINVERTEBRATES; RIVERINE ECOSYSTEMS; BENTHIC
   COMMUNITIES; INVASIVE AMPHIPODS; MULTIPLE STRESSORS; PLECOPTERA INSECTA;
   CHANGE IMPACTS; FLOW REGIMES; RHONE RIVER; LAND-USE
AB Long-term observations on riverine benthic invertebrate communities enable assessments of the potential impacts of global change on stream ecosystems. Besides increasing average temperatures, many studies predict greater temperature extremes and intense precipitation events as a consequence of climate change. In this study we examined long-term observation data (10-32 years) of 26 streams and rivers from four ecoregions in the European Long-Term Ecological Research (LTER) network, to investigate invertebrate community responses to changing climatic conditions. We used functional trait and multi-taxonomic analyses and combined examinations of general long-term changes in communities with detailed analyses of the impact of different climatic drivers (i.e., various temperature and precipitation variables) by focusing on the response of communities to climatic conditions of the previous year. Taxa and ecoregions differed substantially in their response to climate change conditions. We did not observe any trend of changes in total taxonomic richness or overall abundance over time or with increasing temperatures, which reflects a compensatory turnover in the composition of communities; sensitive Plecoptera decreased in response to warmer years and Ephemeroptera increased in northern regions. Invasive species increased with an increasing number of extreme days which also caused an apparent upstream community movement. The observed changes in functional feeding group diversity indicate that climate change may be associated with changes in trophic interactions within aquatic food webs. These findings highlight the vulnerability of riverine ecosystems to climate change and emphasize the need to further explore the interactive effects of climate change variables with other local stressors to develop appropriate conservation measures. (C) 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
RI Sundermann, Andrea/A-2938-2009; Jourdan, Jonas/Y-7389-2018; Haase,
   Peter/A-5644-2011; O'Hara, Robert/A-7499-2008; Monteith,
   Donald/C-1534-2008
OI O'Hara, Robert/0000-0001-9737-3724; Monteith,
   Donald/0000-0003-3219-1772; Tonkin, Jonathan/0000-0002-6053-291X;
   Pilotto, Francesca/0000-0003-1848-3154; Kuemmerlen,
   Mathias/0000-0003-1362-3701; Jourdan, Jonas/0000-0002-2745-2520
TC 7
Z9 7
SN 0048-9697
EI 1879-1026
PD APR 15
PY 2018
VL 621
BP 588
EP 599
DI 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.11.242
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000424196800060
PM 29195206
ER

PT J
AU Luo, K
   Hu, XB
   He, Q
   Wu, ZS
   Cheng, H
   Hu, ZL
   Mazumder, A
AF Luo, Kun
   Hu, Xuebin
   He, Qiang
   Wu, Zhengsong
   Cheng, Hao
   Hu, Zhenlong
   Mazumder, Asit
TI Impacts of rapid urbanization on the water quality and macroinvertebrate
   communities of streams: A case study in Liangjiang New Area, China
SO SCIENCE OF THE TOTAL ENVIRONMENT
DT Article
DE Urbanization; Urban stream; Macroinvertebrate; Canonical correspondence
   analysis; Liangjiang New Area
ID MULTIPLE SPATIAL SCALES; LAND-USE; RIVER-BASIN; BENTHIC
   MACROINVERTEBRATES; CATCHMENT URBANIZATION; ENVIRONMENTAL-FACTORS;
   TAXONOMIC RESOLUTION; HEADWATER STREAMS; FUNCTIONAL TRAITS;
   HEALTH-ASSESSMENT
AB Rapid urbanization in China has dramatically deteriorated the water quality of streams and threatening aquatic ecosystem health. This study aims to 1) assess the impacts of urbanization on water quality and macroinvertebrate composition and 2) address the question of how urbanization affects macroinvertebrate distribution patterns. Environmental variables over multispatial scales and macroinvertebrate community data were collected on April (dry season) and September (wet season) of 2014 and 2015 at 19 sampling sites, of which nine had a high urbanization level (HUL), six had moderate urbanization level (MUL) and four had low urbanization level (LUL), in the Liangjiang New Area. The results of this study showed that macroinvertebrate assemblages significantly varied across the three urbanization levels. The sensitive species (e.g., EPT taxa) were mainly centralized at LUL sites, whereas tolerant species, such as Tubificidae (17.3%), Chironomidae (12.1%), and Physidae (4.61%), reached highest relative abundance at LUL sites. The values of family biotic index (FBI) and biological monitoring working party (BMWP) indicated the deterioration of water quality along urbanization gradient. Seasonal and inter -annual changes in macroinvertebrate communities were not observed. The results of variation partitioning analyses (CCAs) showed that habitat scale variables explained the major variation in macroinvertebrate community composition. Specifically, the increased nutrient concentrations favored tolerant species, whereas high water flow and substrate coarseness benefitted community taxa richness, diversity and EPT richness. Considering the interactions between scale-related processes, the results of this study suggested that urbanization resulted in less diverse and more tolerant stream macroinvertebrate assemblages mainly via increased nutrient concentrations and reduced substrate coarseness. (C) 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
TC 2
Z9 3
SN 0048-9697
EI 1879-1026
PD APR 15
PY 2018
VL 621
BP 1601
EP 1614
DI 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.10.068
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000424196800157
PM 29054671
ER

PT J
AU Armenteros, M
   Saladrigas, D
   Gonzalez-Casuso, L
   Estevez, ED
   Kowalewski, M
AF Armenteros, Maickel
   Saladrigas, Dania
   Gonzalez-Casuso, Lorena
   Estevez, Ernest D.
   Kowalewski, Michal
TI The role of habitat selection on the diversity of macrobenthic
   communities in three gulfs of the Cuban Archipelago
SO BULLETIN OF MARINE SCIENCE
DT Article
ID TAXONOMIC DISTINCTNESS; ECOSYSTEM ENGINEERS; BIOLOGICAL TRAITS; SAMPLING
   DESIGN; SOFT-BOTTOMS; TRACE-METALS; ASSEMBLAGES; BIODIVERSITY;
   MACROFAUNA; MOLLUSKS
AB Diversity and faunal composition of macrobenthic communities remain poorly known in the Caribbean Sea. Here, we explore the diversity and abundance of marine macrobenthos across three gulfs of the Cuban Archipelago and examine the role of habitat type in determining faunal composition and function. Samples collected from 32 soft-bottom sites across four habitat types (mangroves, seagrass beds, unvegetated mud bottoms, and coral reefs) yielded 4231 individuals representing 22 higher macrobenthic taxa. The most abundant taxa were polychaetes, nematodes, crustaceans, and mollusks. Mollusk fauna was particularly diverse (105 species and 74 genera) despite being dominated by two taxa: a bivalve (Parvilucina sp.) and gastropods (Caecum spp). Habitat type was weakly interrelated with the faunal composition of the entire macrobenthos and its molluscan component (<20% of explained variance, in both cases). This weak correlation might reflect the influence of within-habitat heterogeneity, ecological drift, or dispersal barriers. Functional traits differed among habitats, with infaunal mollusks typically found in mud bottom and carnivores more abundant in mangroves. The regional mollusk species richness (105 species) exceeded the richness observed within individual gulfs (39, 40, and 59 species), highlighting high regional diversity. Anthropogenic factors could also be at play. The results suggest, tentatively, that fisheries might have affected the functional and taxonomic structuring of the sampled macrobenthic communities. This initial survey suggests that habitat selection does not exert a strong effect on the macrobenthos (or its molluscan component), and other assembly processes such as drift, dispersal, and human impacts may be important.
OI Armenteros, Maickel/0000-0002-9736-9247
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0007-4977
EI 1553-6955
PD APR
PY 2018
VL 94
IS 2
BP 249
EP 268
DI 10.5343/bms.2017.1013
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000439017000007
ER

PT J
AU Mora, MS
   Becerra, F
   Vassallo, AI
AF Sebastian Mora, Matias
   Becerra, Federico
   Ivan Vassallo, Aldo
TI An allometric analysis of sexual dimorphism in Ctenomys australis:
   integrating classic morphometry and functional performance in vivo
SO ZOOLOGY
DT Article
DE Sexual dimorphism; Allometry; Ontogenetic trajectories; Bending/torsion
   strength; Bite force
ID CAVIOMORPH RODENTS RODENTIA; TUCO-TUCO; GENUS CTENOMYS; SIZE DIMORPHISM;
   BITE FORCE; SUBTERRANEAN RODENTS; FAMILY CTENOMYIDAE; ADAPTIVE
   DIVERSITY; BITING PERFORMANCE; GENETIC-STRUCTURE
AB The South American rodents of the genus Ctenomys (Rodentia, Hystricognathi), which use both forelimbs and incisors to dig, show strong, specialized morphological adaptations to living in the underground niche. In these rodents, the effectiveness of a bite - in this case the potential to inflict physical damage - mostly depends on the strength of the incisors (e.g. bending and torsion stresses) and the power of the masseteric muscle of the jaw. Ctenomys australis (the sand dune tuco-tuco) is a highly territorial subterranean rodent that builds large and exclusive burrow systems in coastal sand dunes found continuously along the Atlantic coast of the Buenos Aires province, Argentina. Incisors in this species are used both in agonistic encounters among congeners (i.e. reproductive or territorial intentions) as well as to dig and increase the size of their burrows daily (e.g. acquisition of plant material as food resources). We first characterized sexual dimorphism in cranial traits involved in aggressive interactions between males, analyzing ontogenetic trajectories of both sexes. We also analyzed some remarkable attributes of sexual dimorphism in subadult and adult individuals, the bending and torsion stresses and the bite performance in vivo, hypothesizing that males are able to apply comparatively stronger bite forces at their incisor tips than females, concordant with a broader mandible for the insertion of a powerful adductor musculature. Bite forces were measured in vivo in wild animals of both sexes using a strain gauge load cell force transducer. These individuals were also used to estimate the incisor area (CA), the 2nd moment of inertia of the incisors (I, or the bending strength to external forces), and the torsional strength of the incisor (J), all traits involved in the production of the force that can be withstood at the incisor tips. Ontogeny explained some sexual differences in the cranial traits of adults, expressed as (i) morphological changes related to body size variation, and (ii) morphological changes associated with differences in the slope of ontogenetic trajectories (regardless of body size variation). Recordings of in vivo bite forces were significantly higher in adult males than in females. These differences in bite forces were not associated with the sex itself, but the sexual dimorphism in body size. Although males did not show significantly higher allometric coefficients for I, J and CA than females, males still showed a strong sexual dimorphism in these traits due to body size variation. On the other hand, measurements of mandibular width - an estimator of the relative size of masseteric muscles - in vivo showed strong differences between sexes, suggesting higher force performance at the incisor tips for males. Overall, we observed that many attributes related to bite performance might have been molded by sexual selection, which implies differences in allometric coefficients from some morphological traits throughout ontogeny.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0944-2006
PD APR
PY 2018
VL 127
BP 27
EP 39
DI 10.1016/j.zool.2018.02.005
SC Zoology
UT WOS:000432763300003
PM 29599013
ER

PT J
AU Al, MA
   Gao, YY
   Xu, GJ
   Wang, Z
   Warren, A
   Xu, HL
AF Al, Mamun Abdullah
   Gao, Yangyang
   Xu, Guangjian
   Wang, Zheng
   Warren, Alan
   Xu, Henglong
TI Trophic-functional patterns of biofilm-dwelling ciliates at different
   water depths in coastal waters of the Yellow Sea, northern China
SO EUROPEAN JOURNAL OF PROTISTOLOGY
DT Article
DE Biofilm-dwelling ciliates; Coastal waters; Trophic-functional groups;
   Vertical variation; Yellow Sea
ID ARTIFICIAL SUBSTRATUM; ENVIRONMENTAL-CONDITIONS; COLONIZATION DYNAMICS;
   MARINE BIOASSESSMENT; QUALITY STATUS; COMMUNITIES; PROTOZOA; LAKE;
   ECOSYSTEMS; POLLUTION
AB Vertical variations in trophic-functional patterns of biofilm-dwelling ciliates were studied in coastal waters of the Yellow Sea, northern China. A total of 50 species were identified and assigned to four trophic-functional groups (TFgrs): algivores (A), bacterivorous (B), non-selective (N) and raptors (R). The trophic-functional structures of the ciliate communities showed significant variability among different water depths: (1) with increasing water depth, relative species numbers and relative abundances of groups A and R decreased sharply whereas those of groups B and N increased gradually; (2) in terms of the frequency of occurrences, group A dominated at depths of 1-3.5 m whereas group B dominated at 5 m, while in terms of the probability density function of the trophic-functional spectrum, group A was the highest contributor at 1 m and group B was highest at the other three depths; (3) distance-based redundancy analyses revealed significant differences in trophic-functional patterns among the four depths, except between 2 and 3.5 m (P> 0.05); and (4) the trophic-functional trait diversity increased from 1 to 3.5 m and decreased sharply at S m. Our results suggest that the biofilm-dwelling dilates maintain a stable trophic-functional pattern and high biodiversity at depths of 1-3.5 m. (C) 2018 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0932-4739
EI 1618-0429
PD APR
PY 2018
VL 63
BP 34
EP 43
DI 10.1016/j.ejop.2018.01.003
SC Microbiology
UT WOS:000432527800004
PM 29407610
ER

PT J
AU Pastor, A
   Mariani, P
   Erichsen, AC
   Hansen, FT
   Hansen, JLS
AF Pastor, Ane
   Mariani, Patrizio
   Erichsen, Anders Chr.
   Hansen, Flemming Thorbjorn
   Hansen, Jorgen L. S.
TI Modeling dispersal and spatial connectivity of macro-invertebrates in
   Danish waters: An agent-based approach
SO REGIONAL STUDIES IN MARINE SCIENCE
DT Article
DE Larval dispersal; Agent-based model; Macro-invertebrates; Connectivity;
   Trait-based models
ID NORTH-ATLANTIC OSCILLATION; POPULATION CONNECTIVITY; LARVAL DISPERSAL;
   BENTHIC INVERTEBRATES; SPECIES RICHNESS; BALTIC SEA; MARINE; REEF;
   SETTLEMENT; CONSEQUENCES
AB Marine organisms with planktonic life stages are subjected to extensive transport that results from the interactions between ocean currents and their behavioral responses to environmental changes in the course of their life. Questions remain on the identification of key drivers of dispersal and connectivity in marine populations as they can have multiple uses in the conservation and management of marine ecosystems. Here we investigate whether the open Kattegat, at the entrance to Baltic Sea, is the main source of recruitment to the benthos in associated estuaries and coastal sites through export of planktonic invertebrate larvae. We couple a 3D hydrodynamic ocean model (MIKE3FM) to an agent-based model and simulate the dispersal of macro-invertebrate populations in Danish waters. We use characteristic dispersal traits of the larval community (pelagic larval duration, spawning season, and settling behavior) and simulate dispersal processes within the muddy bottom habitats to derive recruitment rates and potential donor populations leading to population connectivity patterns on each site, one bay and two Danish fjords. We then use our recruitment results in the bay to compare them with field data on species diversity in the same area. A total of 48 different combinations of pelagic larval durations and spawning seasons of macro-invertebrates are simulated in two years 2004 and 2010. From these results, we conclude that the central and southern parts of the Danish waters are identified as important spawning grounds whereas the Kattegat does not seem to be the main provider of larvae into the selected sites. The model also predicts higher abundance and recruitment rates of macro-invertebrate larvae in 2010 compared to 2004. These results are supported by comparable species distribution data collected in the study area. Our results show the importance of an integrated modeling tool combining ocean circulation and biological traits to obtain a detailed description of dispersal and connectivity of macro-invertebrate community in the area, which can provide a more accurate baseline to manage marine biodiversity. (C) 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 2352-4855
PD APR
PY 2018
VL 20
BP 45
EP 59
DI 10.1016/j.rsma.2018.03.005
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000432525400005
ER

PT J
AU Head, CEI
   Koldewey, H
   Pavoine, S
   Pratchett, MS
   Rogers, AD
   Taylor, ML
   Bonsall, MB
AF Head, Catherine E. I.
   Koldewey, Heather
   Pavoine, Sandrine
   Pratchett, Morgan S.
   Rogers, Alex D.
   Taylor, Michelle L.
   Bonsall, Michael B.
TI Trait and phylogenetic diversity provide insights into community
   assembly of reef-associated shrimps (Palaemonidae) at different spatial
   scales across the Chagos Archipelago
SO ECOLOGY AND EVOLUTION
DT Article
DE Chagos Archipelago; convergent and conserved evolution; coral reefs;
   cryptofauna; environmental filtering; metacommunity; phylogenetic
   diversity; trait diversity
ID GREAT-BARRIER-REEF; CRUSTACEA DECAPODA; SPECIES-DIVERSITY; FUNCTIONAL
   DIVERSITY; PONTONIINE SHRIMPS; PLANT-COMMUNITIES; UNIFIED APPROACH;
   CORAL-REEF; ECOLOGY; SIMILARITY
AB Coral reefs are the most biodiverse marine ecosystem and one of the most threatened by global climate change impacts. The vast majority of diversity on reefs is comprised of small invertebrates that live within the reef structure, termed the cryptofauna. This component of biodiversity is hugely understudied, and many species remain undescribed. This study represents a rare analysis of assembly processes structuring a distinct group of cryptofauna, the Palaemonidae, in the Chagos Archipelago, a reef ecosystem under minimal direct human impacts in the central Indian Ocean. The Palaemonidae are a diverse group of Caridae (infraorder of shrimps) that inhabit many different niches on coral reefs and are of particular interest because of their varied habitat associations. Phylogenetic and trait diversity and phylogenetic signal were used to infer likely drivers of community structure. The mechanisms driving palaemonid community assembly and maintenance in the Chagos Archipelago showed distinct spatial patterns. At local scales, among coral colonies and among reefs fringing individual atolls, significant trait, and phylogenetic clustering patterns suggest environmental filtering may be a dominant ecological process driving Palaemonidae community structure, although local competition through equalizing mechanisms may also play a role in shaping the local community structure. Importantly, we also tested the robustness of phylogenetic diversity to changes in evolutionary information as multi-gene phylogenies are resource intensive and for large families, such as the Palaemonidae, are often incomplete. These tests demonstrated a very modest impact on phylogenetic community structure, with only one of the four genes (PEPCK gene) in the phylogeny affecting phylogenetic diversity patterns, which provides useful information for future studies on large families with incomplete phylogenies. These findings contribute to our limited knowledge of this component of biodiversity in a marine locality as close to undisturbed by humans as can be found. It also provides a rare evaluation of phylogenetic diversity methods.
OI Head, Catherine/0000-0002-5145-1632
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 2045-7758
PD APR
PY 2018
VL 8
IS 8
BP 4098
EP 4107
DI 10.1002/ece3.3969
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000430807200026
PM 29721283
ER

PT J
AU Pakeman, RJ
   Lewis, RJ
AF Pakeman, Robin J.
   Lewis, Rob J.
TI Functional similarity analysis highlights ecosystem impacts and
   restoration needs
SO APPLIED VEGETATION SCIENCE
DT Article
DE coastal vegetation; convex hull; functional richness; functional
   beta-diversity; machair; plant functional traits; sand dune
ID EUROPEAN FISH ASSEMBLAGES; DIVERSITY INDEXES; BETA DIVERSITY; PLANT
   TRAITS; COMMUNITIES; VEGETATION; TURNOVER; COASTAL; DEPOSITION; UK
AB Aims: To test a recently developed method of assessing functional beta-diversity - as the difference in location of the convex hull in trait space - as a means of assessing the impact of species loss and colonization over time on functional composition. This approach was tested using data from a survey and subsequent resurvey of Scottish coastal vegetation.
   Location: Scotland, UK.
   Results: Fixed dunes, slacks, unimproved grassland and mires showed the highest functional overlap through time (high correspondence in convex hull position between two surveys), while salt marsh, improved grassland and heath showed the lowest. Fixed dune was the most stable in terms of retaining the highest proportion of the original convex hull, while salt marsh was least stable. Salt marsh also showed the highest new functional space occupied, whilst mires and slacks showed the least colonization by functionally distinct species. Generally sites on the west coast of Scotland were most stable, while those on the east showed the greatest functional changes. Assessing functional beta-diversity provided a different picture to assessing species beta-diversity; high species turnover might have little impact on the functional characteristics of the vegetation, whereas the invasion of one functionally different species can have a sizeable impact on ecosystem processes.
   Conclusions: The method proved effective in highlighting habitats and sites where species changes had the largest impact on the functional space occupied by the plant assemblage. The method provides complementary information to that derived from other types of analysis, including about the potential needs for improved management or full-scale restoration.
OI Pakeman, Robin/0000-0001-6248-4133
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 1402-2001
EI 1654-109X
PD APR
PY 2018
VL 21
IS 2
BP 258
EP 266
DI 10.1111/avsc.12353
SC Plant Sciences; Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Forestry
UT WOS:000430912500010
ER

PT J
AU Muller-Karger, FE
   Hestir, E
   Ade, C
   Turpie, K
   Roberts, DA
   Siegel, D
   Miller, RJ
   Humm, D
   Izenberg, N
   Keller, M
   Morgan, F
   Frouin, R
   Dekker, AG
   Gardner, R
   Goodman, J
   Schaeffer, B
   Franz, BA
   Pahlevan, N
   Mannino, AG
   Concha, JA
   Ackleson, SG
   Cavanaugh, KC
   Romanou, A
   Tzortziou, M
   Boss, ES
   Pavlick, R
   Freeman, A
   Rousseaux, CS
   Dunne, J
   Long, MC
   Klein, E
   McKinley, GA
   Goes, J
   Letelier, R
   Kavanaugh, M
   Roffer, M
   Bracher, A
   Arrigo, KR
   Dierssen, H
   Zhang, XD
   Davis, FW
   Best, B
   Guralnick, R
   Moisan, J
   Sosik, HM
   Kudela, R
   Mouw, CB
   Barnard, AH
   Palacios, S
   Roesler, C
   Drakou, EG
   Appeltans, W
   Jetz, W
AF Muller-Karger, Frank E.
   Hestir, Erin
   Ade, Christiana
   Turpie, Kevin
   Roberts, Dar A.
   Siegel, David
   Miller, Robert J.
   Humm, David
   Izenberg, Noam
   Keller, Mary
   Morgan, Frank
   Frouin, Robert
   Dekker, Arnold G.
   Gardner, Royal
   Goodman, James
   Schaeffer, Blake
   Franz, Bryan A.
   Pahlevan, Nima
   Mannino, Antonio G.
   Concha, Javier A.
   Ackleson, Steven G.
   Cavanaugh, Kyle C.
   Romanou, Anastasia
   Tzortziou, Maria
   Boss, Emmanuel S.
   Pavlick, Ryan
   Freeman, Anthony
   Rousseaux, Cecile S.
   Dunne, John
   Long, Matthew C.
   Klein, Eduardo
   McKinley, Galen A.
   Goes, Joachim
   Letelier, Ricardo
   Kavanaugh, Maria
   Roffer, Mitchell
   Bracher, Astrid
   Arrigo, Kevin R.
   Dierssen, Heidi
   Zhang, Xiaodong
   Davis, Frank W.
   Best, Ben
   Guralnick, Robert
   Moisan, John
   Sosik, Heidi M.
   Kudela, Raphael
   Mouw, Colleen B.
   Barnard, Andrew H.
   Palacios, Sherry
   Roesler, Collin
   Drakou, Evangelia G.
   Appeltans, Ward
   Jetz, Walter
TI Satellite sensor requirements for monitoring essential biodiversity
   variables of coastal ecosystems
SO ECOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS
DT Article
DE aquatic; coastal zone; ecology; essential biodiversity variables; H4
   imaging; hyperspectral; remote sensing; vegetation; wetland
ID OCEAN-COLOR DATA; ATMOSPHERIC CORRECTION; IMAGING SPECTROSCOPY;
   SPATIAL-RESOLUTION; MARINE PLANKTON; CLIMATE-CHANGE; WETLAND LOSS; SWIR
   BANDS; TAMPA BAY; WATER
AB The biodiversity and high productivity of coastal terrestrial and aquatic habitats are the foundation for important benefits to human societies around the world. These globally distributed habitats need frequent and broad systematic assessments, but field surveys only cover a small fraction of these areas. Satellite-based sensors can repeatedly record the visible and near-infrared reflectance spectra that contain the absorption, scattering, and fluorescence signatures of functional phytoplankton groups, colored dissolved matter, and particulate matter near the surface ocean, and of biologically structured habitats (floating and emergent vegetation, benthic habitats like coral, seagrass, and algae). These measures can be incorporated into Essential Biodiversity Variables (EBVs), including the distribution, abundance, and traits of groups of species populations, and used to evaluate habitat fragmentation. However, current and planned satellites are not designed to observe the EBVs that change rapidly with extreme tides, salinity, temperatures, storms, pollution, or physical habitat destruction over scales relevant to human activity. Making these observations requires a new generation of satellite sensors able to sample with these combined characteristics: (1) spatial resolution on the order of 30 to 100-m pixels or smaller; (2) spectral resolution on the order of 5nm in the visible and 10nm in the short-wave infrared spectrum (or at least two or more bands at 1,030, 1,240, 1,630, 2,125, and/or 2,260nm) for atmospheric correction and aquatic and vegetation assessments; (3) radiometric quality with signal to noise ratios (SNR) above 800 (relative to signal levels typical of the open ocean), 14-bit digitization, absolute radiometric calibration <2%, relative calibration of 0.2%, polarization sensitivity <1%, high radiometric stability and linearity, and operations designed to minimize sunglint; and (4) temporal resolution of hours to days. We refer to these combined specifications as H4 imaging. Enabling H4 imaging is vital for the conservation and management of global biodiversity and ecosystem services, including food provisioning and water security. An agile satellite in a 3-d repeat low-Earth orbit could sample 30-km swath images of several hundred coastal habitats daily. Nine H4 satellites would provide weekly coverage of global coastal zones. Such satellite constellations are now feasible and are used in various applications.
RI Bracher, Astrid/B-7805-2013; Dekker, Arnold/G-8863-2011; Humm,
   David/B-8825-2016; Dunne, John/F-8086-2012
OI Bracher, Astrid/0000-0003-3025-5517; Dekker, Arnold/0000-0002-8160-6498;
   Humm, David/0000-0003-1520-261X; Dunne, John/0000-0002-8794-0489;
   Muller-Karger, Frank/0000-0003-3159-5011; Letelier,
   Ricardo/0000-0003-3376-4026
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 1051-0761
EI 1939-5582
PD APR
PY 2018
VL 28
IS 3
BP 749
EP 760
DI 10.1002/eap.1682
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000430466300012
PM 29509310
ER

PT J
AU McKie, BG
   Sandin, L
   Carlson, PE
   Johnson, RK
AF McKie, B. G.
   Sandin, L.
   Carlson, P. E.
   Johnson, R. K.
TI Species traits reveal effects of land use, season and habitat on the
   potential subsidy of stream invertebrates to terrestrial food webs
SO AQUATIC SCIENCES
DT Article
DE Benthic invertebrates; Dispersal traits; Cross ecosystem resource flows;
   Emerging aquatic insects; Land-use change; Life history traits
ID ADULT AQUATIC INSECTS; FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; RESOURCE SUBSIDY; RIPARIAN;
   MACROINVERTEBRATES; ECOSYSTEMS; LANDSCAPE; LINKAGES; BIRDS; WATER
AB Adult aquatic insects with a terrestrial life-stage are important vectors transferring resources assimilated in freshwater environments to terrestrial consumers. Research on this linkage has focused particularly on how terrestrial environmental features affect dispersal of adult aquatic insects, and on the responses of terrestrial consumers. However, both the timing and extent of dispersal by adult aquatic insects are further regulated by their species-specific life history traits. We sampled aquatic invertebrates from nine streams in central Sweden, and assessed how the composition of key traits related to dispersal and life history varied between in-stream habitats (riffles, pools), seasons (autumn, spring), and among streams differing in catchment land use (forested, agriculture). Traits indicative of more limited adult dispersal (e.g. small adult size and weak flying strength), along with traits indicative of strongly pulsed peaks in emergence (e.g. univoltinism and well-synchronised emergence) were all more abundant in the agricultural than forested streams in the autumn. However, these differences had disappeared by late spring, possibly reflecting early emergence by the univoltine taxa that dominated the agricultural stream communities and/or elevated mortality in the agricultural streams. Riffles supported higher abundances of insects with strongly flying adults, whereas traits associated with more limited dispersal were characteristic of insect assemblages in pools, which also supported the highest proportion of invertebrates completely lacking an adult flying stage. This result is likely to have implications at larger scales, given the dominance of soft-bottomed pool habitats and scarcity of riffles in many agricultural landscapes. Overall, our analysis indicates that while overall production of aquatic invertebrates with a winged adult was greater in agricultural streams, availability of this productivity for terrestrial consumers is more likely to be spatially restricted closer to the stream channel, and potentially also more temporally pulsed
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1015-1621
EI 1420-9055
PD APR
PY 2018
VL 80
IS 2
AR UNSP 15
DI 10.1007/s00027-018-0565-4
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000429435600011
ER

PT J
AU Oug, E
   Sundet, JH
   Cochrane, SIJ
AF Oug, Eivind
   Sundet, Jan H.
   Cochrane, Sabine I. J.
TI Structural and functional changes of soft-bottom ecosystems in northern
   fjords invaded by the red king crab (Paralithodes camtschaticus)
SO JOURNAL OF MARINE SYSTEMS
DT Article
DE Soft bottom fauna; Red king crab invasion; Non-indigenous species;
   Ecosystem functioning; Northern Norway
ID HIGH-LATITUDE ECOSYSTEM; BARENTS SEA; MACROBENTHIC BIOMASS; DYNAMICS;
   TRAITS; SCALE; COMMUNITIES; ASSEMBLAGES; MANAGEMENT; DISPERSAL
AB The red king crab invaded Norwegian coastal waters in the early 1990s after having been introduced from the northern Pacific to the Russian Barents Sea coast. The crab stock increased rapidly in NE northern Norway in the latter half of the 1990s, and since 2002 there has been a commercial fishery in the eastern invaded areas. The crab is an active predator on benthic fauna especially feeding in deep soft-bottom environments. The present study is a follow-up of previous studies (2007-09) to assess the effects of the king crab predation on soft bottom species composition, ecological functioning and sediment quality. Macroinfauna (>1 mm) was investigated in three fjord areas in the Varanger region with low, moderate and very high crab abundances, respectively. Compared with data from 1994, most benthic species were markedly reduced in abundance, in particular non-moving burrowing and tube-dwelling polychaetes, bivalves and echinoderms. However, a few species appeared to recover from 2007-09 to 2012. Changes in ecological functioning were assessed using 'biological traits analysis (BTA)'. Following the crab invasion there was a relative reduction of suspension and surface deposit feeding species, an increase in mobile and predatory organisms and an increase in those with planktotrophic larval development. From low to high crab abundances functioning changed from tube-building, deep deposit feeding and fairly large size to free-living, shallow burrowing and rather small size. With regard to sediment reworking, downward and upward conveyors were reduced whereas surficial modifiers increased. The changes imply that sediment biomixing and bioirrigation were reduced leading to a degraded sedimentary environment. It is suggested that establishing relationships between ecosystem functioning and crab abundances may form the basis for estimating ecological costs of the crab invasion. Such knowledge is important for managing the crab in the Barents Sea area being both a non-indigenous species affecting native ecosystems as well as a valuable resource for commercial fishery. (C) 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license.
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 0924-7963
EI 1879-1573
PD APR
PY 2018
VL 180
BP 255
EP 264
DI 10.1016/j.jmarsys.2017.07.005
SC Geology; Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000429514700025
ER

PT J
AU Semprucci, F
   Cesaroni, L
   Guidi, L
   Balsamo, M
AF Semprucci, F.
   Cesaroni, L.
   Guidi, L.
   Balsamo, M.
TI Do the morphological and functional traits of free-living marine
   nematodes mirror taxonomical diversity?
SO MARINE ENVIRONMENTAL RESEARCH
DT Article
DE Nematoda; Granulometry; Morpho-functional diversity; Physical stress;
   Adaptations
ID MALDIVES INDIAN-OCEAN; DEEP-SEA; NORTH-SEA; MICROHABITAT TYPE; FEEDING
   ECOLOGY; MATURITY INDEX; SOUTHERN BIGHT; LAKE VARANO; ASSEMBLAGES;
   BIODIVERSITY
AB The taxonomical structure and diversity of nematode assemblages are the main attributes analyzed in ecology, but nematode adaptations to their habitats are still understudied. Accordingly, a survey on some known and other newly proposed morpho-functional traits was carried out in order to: determine if the morpho-functional diversity of nematodes mirrors their taxonomical diversity; and assess potential nematode adaptations to sediment type and hydrodynamic stress. Morpho-functional traits were investigated both singularly and together and showed significant differences related to these environmental factors. The greatest taxonomical and morpho-functional diversity was found in medium-coarse sand (M-CS) and at an intermedium energy level (IEL). The M-CS and IEL were probably richer in micro-habitats and subject to a low selective pressure, hosting nematodes with a wide range of adaptations. The mirroring of morpho-functional diversity with taxonomical diversity is crucial for the future growth of the use of nematodes in biomonitoring. This is because the study of their morpho-functional traits could reduce the level of work involved and the costs of any analyses.
RI Semprucci, Federica/N-5889-2014
OI Semprucci, Federica/0000-0003-1360-7242; Balsamo,
   Maria/0000-0002-7947-0632
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0141-1136
EI 1879-0291
PD APR
PY 2018
VL 135
BP 114
EP 122
DI 10.1016/j.marenvres.2018.02.001
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology;
   Toxicology
UT WOS:000428482300012
PM 29449071
ER

PT J
AU Migliorini, GH
   Srivastava, DS
   Romero, GQ
AF Migliorini, Gustavo H.
   Srivastava, Diane S.
   Romero, Gustavo Q.
TI Leaf litter traits drive community structure and functioning in a
   natural aquatic microcosm
SO FRESHWATER BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE aquatic detritivores; colonisation; decomposition; litter traits;
   phytotelmata
ID TERRESTRIAL ECOSYSTEMS; DECOMPOSITION DYNAMICS; TROPICAL STREAMS;
   FOOD-WEB; QUALITY; DIVERSITY; BIODIVERSITY; DETRITUS; DETRITIVORES;
   SHREDDERS
AB Leaf litter fuels secondary production in many aquatic ecosystems. Although the identity and species richness of leaf litter have been shown to influence ecosystem functioning and food-web composition, it has been challenging to relate such patterns to mechanisms based on litter traits. Here, we investigate how six different leaf litter species, and their mixture, affect litter decomposition, as well as the colonisation and survival of associated aquatic invertebrates in natural microecosystems (tank bromeliads). We then ask whether these effects of litter composition are explained by chemical and structural traits of the litter. Litter composition affected decomposition rates, assembly of aquatic macroinvertebrates in bromeliads and survival of some detritivores (e.g. Chironomidae). In general, most of this effect of litter composition was due to differences between litter species, not between single-species and six-species mixtures, and could be explained in terms of two dominant axes in litter traits. Decomposition was fastest in litters with high specific leaf area (SLA), N:P ratios and N and P contents, and slowest in litters with high lignin content and C:N ratios. Chironomid survival was also greatest on high N, N:P and SLA litters. Our results highlight the importance of considering leaf litter traits on the structure and functioning of freshwater ecosystems in future studies. More broadly, these results add to a growing consensus that functional traits of resource species, rather than the number of resource species, are essential to predicting resource-consumer interactions in food webs.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0046-5070
EI 1365-2427
PD APR
PY 2018
VL 63
IS 4
BP 341
EP 352
DI 10.1111/fwb.13072
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000427116200002
ER

PT J
AU Schaum, CE
   Ffrench-Constant, R
   Lowe, C
   Olafsson, JS
   Padfield, D
   Yvon-Durocher, G
AF Schaum, C. Elisa
   Ffrench-Constant, Richard
   Lowe, Chris
   Olafsson, Jon S.
   Padfield, Daniel
   Yvon-Durocher, Gabriel
CA Student Res Team
TI Temperature-driven selection on metabolic traits increases the strength
   of an algal-grazer interaction in naturally warmed streams
SO GLOBAL CHANGE BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE consumer-resource interactions; global warming; interaction strength;
   metabolism; thermal adaptation
ID FOOD-WEB STRUCTURE; CLIMATE-CHANGE; TROPHIC INTERACTIONS; EVOLUTIONARY
   DYNAMICS; FUNCTIONAL-RESPONSES; GENETIC-DIVERGENCE; REACTION NORMS;
   FEEDING RATES; GROWTH-RATES; TOP-DOWN
AB Trophic interactions are important determinants of the structure and functioning of ecosystems. Because the metabolism and consumption rates of ectotherms increase sharply with temperature, there are major concerns that global warming will increase the strength of trophic interactions, destabilizing food webs, and altering ecosystem structure and function. We used geothermally warmed streams that span an 11 degrees C temperature gradient to investigate the interplay between temperature-driven selection on traits related to metabolism and resource acquisition, and the interaction strength between the keystone gastropod grazer, Radix balthica, and a common algal resource. Populations from a warm stream (similar to 28 degrees C) had higher maximal metabolic rates and optimal temperatures than their counterparts from a cold stream (similar to 17 degrees C). We found that metabolic rates of the population originating from the warmer stream were higher across all measurement temperatures. A reciprocal transplant experiment demonstrated that the interaction strengths between the grazer and its algal resource were highest for both populations when transplanted into the warm stream. In line with the thermal dependence of respiration, interaction strengths involving grazers from the warm stream were always higher than those with grazers from the cold stream. These results imply that increases in metabolism and resource consumption mediated by the direct, thermodynamic effects of higher temperatures on physiological rates are not mitigated by metabolic compensation in the long term, and suggest that warming could increase the strength of algal-grazer interactions with likely knock-on effects for the biodiversity and productivity of aquatic ecosystems.
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 1354-1013
EI 1365-2486
PD APR
PY 2018
VL 24
IS 4
BP 1793
EP 1803
DI 10.1111/gcb.14033
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000426504400029
PM 29281766
ER

PT J
AU Chen, SY
   Carey, CC
   Little, JC
   Lofton, ME
   McClure, RP
   Lei, CW
AF Chen, Shengyang
   Carey, Cayelan C.
   Little, John C.
   Lofton, Mary E.
   McClure, Ryan P.
   Lei, Chengwang
TI Effectiveness of a bubble-plume mixing system for managing phytoplankton
   in lakes and reservoirs
SO ECOLOGICAL ENGINEERING
DT Article
DE Bubble-plume mixing; Hydrodynamics; Ecological modelling; Biogeochemical
   modelling; Phytoplankton management; Algal blooms
ID HYPOLIMNETIC OXYGENATION; SEDIMENT RESUSPENSION; SETTLING VELOCITY;
   EFFECTIVE DENSITY; ALGAL BLOOM; MANAGEMENT; MODELS; GROWTH; WATER; WIDE
AB Bubble-plume mixing systems are often deployed in eutrophic lakes and reservoirs to manage phytoplankton taxa. Unfortunately, inconsistent outcomes from bubble-plume (induced) mixing are often reported in the literature. The present study investigates the response of phytoplankton to induced mixing using a whole-reservoir field experiment and a three-dimensional hydrodynamic model (Si3D) coupled with the Aquatic EcoDynamics (AED) model through the framework for aquatic biogeochemical modelling (FABM). The coupled Si3D-AED model is validated against a 24-h field mixing experiment and subsequently used for a numerical parametric study to investigate phytoplankton responses to various induced mixing scenarios in which the phytoplankton settling rate, phytoplankton growth rate, reservoir depth, and mixing system diffuser depth were sequentially varied. Field observations during the mixing experiment suggest that the total phytoplankton concentration (measured in mu g/L) across the reservoir was reduced by nearly 10% during the 24-h mixing period. The numerical modeling results show that phytoplankton concentration may be substantially affected by the functional traits of the phytoplankton and the deployment depth of the mixing diffuser. Interestingly, the numerical results indicate that the phytoplankton concentration is controlled by reduced growth rates due to light limitation in deep reservoirs (> 20 m), whereas settling loss is a more important factor in shallow reservoirs during the mixing period. In addition, the coupled Si3D-AED model results suggest that deploying the mixing diffuser deeper in the water column to increase mixing depth may generally improve the successful management of cyanobacteria using bubble-plume mixing systems. Thus, the coupled Si3D-AED model introduced in the present study can assist with the design and operation of bubble-plume mixing systems.
OI Lei, Chengwang/0000-0002-8175-4781
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0925-8574
EI 1872-6992
PD APR 1
PY 2018
VL 113
BP 43
EP 51
DI 10.1016/j.ecoleng.2018.01.002
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Engineering
UT WOS:000426093400006
ER

PT J
AU Berger, E
   Haase, P
   Schafer, RB
   Sundermann, A
AF Berger, Elisabeth
   Haase, Peter
   Schaefer, Ralf B.
   Sundermann, Andrea
TI Towards stressor-specific macroinvertebrate indices: Which traits and
   taxonomic groups are associated with vulnerable and tolerant taxa?
SO SCIENCE OF THE TOTAL ENVIRONMENT
DT Article
DE Trait-based biomonitoring; Micropollutants; Wastewater; Ecotoxicology;
   Multiple stressors
ID FRESH-WATER MACROINVERTEBRATES; LIFE-HISTORY STRATEGIES; BENTHIC
   INVERTEBRATES; BIOLOGICAL TRAITS; MULTIPLE STRESSORS; INTRINSIC
   SENSITIVITY; ECOLOGICAL TRAITS; FUNCTIONAL TRAITS; ASSESSING STREAMS;
   COMMUNITIES
AB Monitoring of macroinvertebrate communities is frequently used to define the ecological health status of rivers. Ideally, biomonitoring should also give an indication on the major stressors acting on the macroinvertebrate communities supporting the selection of appropriate management measures. However, most indices are affected by more than one stressor. Biological traits (e.g. size, generation time, reproduction) could potentially lead to more stressor-specific indices. However, such an approach has rarely been tested.
   In this study we classify 324 macroinvertebrate taxa as vulnerable (decreasing abundances) or tolerant (increasing abundances) along 21 environmental gradients (i.e. nutrients, major ions, oxygen and micropollutants) from 422 monitoring sites in Germany using Threshold Indicator Taxa Analysis (TITAN). Subsequently, we investigate which biological traits and taxonomic groups are associated with taxa classified as vulnerable or tolerant with regard to specific gradients. The response of most taxa towards different gradients was similar and especially high for correlated gradients.
   Traits associated with vulnerable taxa across most gradients included: larval aquatic life stages, isolated cemented eggs, reproductive cycle per year <1, scrapers, aerial and aquatic active dispersal and plastron respiration. Traits associated with tolerant taxa included: adult aquatic life stages, polyvoltinism, ovoviviparity or egg clutches in vegetation, food preference for dead animals or living microinvertebrates, substrate preference for macrophytes, microphytes, silt or mud and a body size >2-4 cm.
   Our results question whether stressor-specific indices based on macroinvertebrate assemblages can be achieved using single traits, because we observed that similar taxa responded to different gradients and also similar traits were associated with vulnerable and tolerant taxa across a variety of water quality gradients. Future studies should examine whether combinations of traits focusing on specific taxonomic groups achieve higher stressor specificity. (c) 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
RI Schaefer, Ralf/E-1926-2011; Haase, Peter/A-5644-2011; Sundermann,
   Andrea/A-2938-2009
OI Schaefer, Ralf/0000-0003-3510-1701; 
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 0048-9697
EI 1879-1026
PD APR 1
PY 2018
VL 619
BP 144
EP 154
DI 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.11.022
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000424144200016
PM 29145051
ER

PT J
AU Op de Beeck, L
   Verheyen, J
   Stoks, R
AF Op de Beeck, Lin
   Verheyen, Julie
   Stoks, Robby
TI Strong differences between two congeneric species in sensitivity to
   pesticides in a warming world
SO SCIENCE OF THE TOTAL ENVIRONMENT
DT Article
DE Critical thermal maximum; Ecological risk assessment; Global climate
   change; Multiple stressors; Organophosphates; 'Pace of life'
ID DAILY TEMPERATURE-VARIATION; DAMSELFLY ISCHNURA-PUMILIO; FRESH-WATER
   INVERTEBRATES; CRITICAL THERMAL MAXIMUM; GLOBAL CLIMATE-CHANGE; AQUATIC
   INVERTEBRATES; INTRINSIC SENSITIVITY; RISK ASSESSMENT; CHLORPYRIFOS;
   EXPOSURE
AB To predict the impact of pesticides in a warming world we need to know how species differ in the interaction pathways between pesticides and warming. Trait-based approaches have been successful in identifying the 'pace of life' and body size as predictors of sensitivity to pesticides among distantly related species. However, it remains to be tested whether these traits allow predicting differences in sensitivity to pesticides between closely related species, and in the strength of the interaction pathways between pesticides and warming. We tested the effects of multiple pulses of chlorpyrifos (allowing accumulation) under warming on key life history traits, heat tolerance (CTmax) and physiology of two congeneric damselfly species: the fast-paced (fast growth and development, high metabolic rate), small Ischnura pumilio and the slow-paced, large I. elegans. Chlorpyrifos reduced survival and growth, but contrary to current trait-based predictions I. pumilio was 8 x less sensitive than I. elegans. The lower sensitivity of I. pumilio could be explained by a higher fat content, and higher activities of acetylcholinesterase and of detoxifying and anti-oxidant enzymes. While for I. pumilio the effect of chlorpyrifos was small and did not depend on temperature, for I. elegans the impact was higher at 20 degrees C compared to 24 degrees C. This matches the higher pesticide accumulation in the water after multiple pulses at 20 degrees C than at 24 degrees C. The expected reduction in heat tolerance after pesticide exposure was present in I. elegans but not in I. pumilio. Our results demonstrate that closely related species can have very different sensitivities to a pesticide resulting in species-specific support for the "toxicant-induced climate change sensitivity" and the "climate-induced toxicant sensitivity" interaction pathways. Our results highlight that trait-based approaches can be strengthened by integrating physiological traits. (c) 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
OI Verheyen, Julie/0000-0001-7496-5137
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0048-9697
EI 1879-1026
PD MAR 15
PY 2018
VL 618
BP 60
EP 69
DI 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.10.311
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000424130500007
PM 29126027
ER

PT J
AU Xiao, WP
   Wang, L
   Laws, E
   Xie, YY
   Chen, JX
   Liu, X
   Chen, BZ
   Huang, BQ
AF Xiao, Wupeng
   Wang, Lei
   Laws, Edward
   Xie, Yuyuan
   Chen, Jixin
   Liu, Xin
   Chen, Bingzhang
   Huang, Bangqin
TI Realized niches explain spatial gradients in seasonal abundance of
   phytoplankton groups in the South China Sea
SO PROGRESS IN OCEANOGRAPHY
DT Article
DE Phytoplankton; Realized niches; Realized traits; Generalized additive
   models; MaxEnt modelling; South China Sea
ID MIXED-LAYER DEPTH; CLIMATE-CHANGE; SURFACE TEMPERATURE; FUNCTIONAL
   TRAITS; NORTH-ATLANTIC; CELL-SIZE; COMMUNITY; DYNAMICS; PROCHLOROCOCCUS;
   CHEMTAX
AB A basic albeit elusive goal of ocean science is to predict the structure of biological communities from the multitude of environmental conditions they experience. Estimates of the realized niche-based traits (realized traits) of phytoplankton species or functional groups in temperate seas have shown that response traits can help reveal the mechanisms responsible for structuring phytoplankton communities, but such approaches have not been tested in tropical and subtropical marginal seas. Here, we used decadal-scale studies of pigment-based phytoplankton groups and environmental conditions in the South China Sea to test whether realized traits could explain the biogeographic patterns of phytoplankton variability. We estimated the mean and breadth of the phytoplankton realized niches based on responses of the group-specific phytoplankton composition to key environmental factors, and we showed that variations of major phytoplankton groups in this system can be explained by different adaptive trade-offs to constraints imposed by temperature, irradiance, and nutrient concentrations. Differences in the patterns of trade-offs clearly separated the dominant groups from one another and generated four sets of realized traits that mirrored the observed biogeographic distribution patterns. The phytoplankton realized niches and their associated traits that we characterized in the present study could help to predict responses of phytoplankton to changes in environmental conditions in the South China Sea and could be incorporated into global biogeochemical models to anticipate shifts in community structure under future climate scenarios.
OI Xie, Yuyuan/0000-0001-9134-3604; LIU, Xin/0000-0002-7925-9618
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 0079-6611
PD MAR
PY 2018
VL 162
BP 223
EP 239
DI 10.1016/j.pocean.2018.03.008
SC Oceanography
UT WOS:000431163600015
ER

PT J
AU Santana, RMD
   Dolbeth, M
   Barbosa, JED
   Patricio, J
AF da Costa Santana, Rosa Maria
   Dolbeth, Marina
   de Lucena Barbosa, Jose Etham
   Patricio, Joana
TI Narrowing the gap: Phytoplankton functional diversity in two disturbed
   tropical estuaries
SO ECOLOGICAL INDICATORS
DT Article
DE Environmental degradation; Functional redundancy; Morphological traits;
   Morphology-based functional groups; Resilience; Semi-arid Brazil
ID DE-LA-PLATA; MORPHOLOGICAL GROUPS; ECOSYSTEM SERVICES; COMMUNITY
   ECOLOGY; SPECIES TRAITS; MARINE; BRAZIL; FISH; EUTROPHICATION;
   ASSEMBLAGES
AB The functional diversity of phytoplankton communities was studied in two tropical estuaries subjected to anthropogenic pressure, despite one being environmentally protected. We applied functional diversity indices, analysed the dominant morphology traits and explored morphology-based functional groups. The less disturbed estuary showed slightly higher diversity and functional redundancy, during a wet season (on average 1.3 higher). Functional groups including nuisance species were more abundant in the heavily disturbed estuary. During a dry season, results for both systems were similar. Overall, abundance and functional diversity were higher in the upstream areas, associated with the river runoff containing freshwater species and essential nutrients for algae development. In both systems, diatoms were dominant (> 75% of the community), however, the group included small and larger individuals, and freshwater to cosmopolitan species. This dominance and the change in traits were associated with sufficient nutrient supply, low light conditions, ressuspension and salinity changes, also associated with river runoff. Overall, the different functional diversity approaches enabled us to improve our understanding of the changes occurring in both systems.
OI Dolbeth, Marina/0000-0002-8775-0351
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 1470-160X
EI 1872-7034
PD MAR
PY 2018
VL 86
BP 81
EP 93
DI 10.1016/j.ecolind.2017.12.003
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000430634600009
ER

PT J
AU Diopere, E
   Vandamme, SG
   Hablutzel, PI
   Cariani, A
   Van Houdt, J
   Rijnsdorp, A
   Tinti, F
   Volckaert, FAM
   Maes, GE
AF Diopere, Eveline
   Vandamme, Sara G.
   Hablutzel, Pascal I.
   Cariani, Alessia
   Van Houdt, Jeroen
   Rijnsdorp, Adriaan
   Tinti, Fausto
   Volckaert, Filip A. M.
   Maes, Gregory E.
CA FishPopTrace Consortium
TI Seascape genetics of a flatfish reveals local selection under high
   levels of gene flow
SO ICES JOURNAL OF MARINE SCIENCE
DT Article
DE fish; isolation by distance; local adaptation; Northeast Atlantic Ocean;
   outlier locus; population genomics; SNP; sole
ID SOLE SOLEA-SOLEA; PLEURONECTES-PLATESSA L.; TURBOT SCOPHTHALMUS-MAXIMUS;
   GADUS-MORHUA L.; NORTH-SEA SOLE; COMMON SOLE; POPULATION-GENETICS; IRISH
   SEA; ATLANTIC-OCEAN; CLIMATE-CHANGE
AB Local adaptation is often found to be in a delicate balance with gene flow in marine species with high dispersal potential. Genotyping with mapped transcriptome-derived markers and advanced seascape statistical analyses are proven tools to uncover the genomic basis of biologically relevant traits under environmental selection. Using a panel of 426 gene-linked single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), we scanned 17 samples (n = 539) of sole (Solea solea L.) from the Northeast Atlantic Ocean and applied a node-based seascape analysis. Neutral loci confirmed a clear distinction between the North Sea-Baltic Sea transition zone and the other Eastern Atlantic samples. At a more subtle level, the latter unit split in an English Channel and North Sea group, and a Bay of Biscay and Atlantic Iberian coast group. A fourth group, the Irish and Celtic Sea, was identified with 19 outlier loci. A pattern of isolation by distance (IBD) characterized the latitudinal distribution. Seascape analyses identified winter seawater temperature, food availability and coastal currents to explain a significant component of geographically distributed genetic variation, suggesting that these factors act as drivers of local adaptation. The evidence for local adaptation is in line with the current understanding on the impact of two key ecological factors, the life-history trait winter mortality and the behaviour of inshore/off-shore spawning. We conclude that the subtle differentiation between two metapopulations (North Sea and Bay of Biscay) mirrors local adaptation. At least three genomic regions with strong population differentiation point to locally divergent selection. Further functional characterization of these genomic regions should help with formulating adaptive management policies.
RI Rijnsdorp, Adriaan/A-4217-2008
OI Rijnsdorp, Adriaan/0000-0003-0785-9662; Cariani,
   Alessia/0000-0002-5513-0086
TC 5
Z9 5
SN 1054-3139
EI 1095-9289
PD MAR-APR
PY 2018
VL 75
IS 2
BP 675
EP 689
DI 10.1093/icesjms/fsx160
SC Fisheries; Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000429491500021
ER

PT J
AU El-Baz, AF
   EI-Enshasy, HA
   Shetaia, YM
   Mahrous, H
   Othman, NZ
   Yousef, AE
AF El-Baz, Ashraf F.
   EI-Enshasy, Hesham A.
   Shetaia, Yousseria M.
   Mahrous, Hoda
   Othman, Nor Zalina
   Yousef, Ahmed E.
TI Semi-industrial Scale Production of a New Yeast with Probiotic Traits,
   Cryptococcus sp YMHS, Isolated from the Red Sea
SO PROBIOTICS AND ANTIMICROBIAL PROTEINS
DT Article
DE Cryptococcus sp.; Probiotic; Marine yeast; Biomass production
ID LACTIC-ACID BACTERIA; RAINBOW-TROUT; SACCHAROMYCES-CEREVISIAE;
   CANDIDA-TROPICALIS; XYLITOL PRODUCTION; INTESTINAL MUCUS; FISH GUT;
   STRAINS; ADHESION; IDENTIFICATION
AB A new yeast strain with promising probiotic traits was isolated from the Red Sea water samples. The isolate (YMHS) was subjected to genetic characterization and identified as Cryptococcus sp. Nucleotide sequence analysis of the rRNA gene internal transcribed spacer regions showed 95% sequence similarity between the isolate and Cryptococcus albidus. Cryptococcus sp. YMHS exhibited desirable characteristics of probiotic microorganisms; it has tolerance to low pH in simulated gastric juice, resistance to bile salts, hydrophobic characteristics, broad antimicrobial activity, and in vitro ability to degrade cholesterol. The isolate grew well in a semi-defined medium composed of yeast extract, glucose, KH2PO4, (NH4)(2)SO4, and MgSO4, yielding cell mass of 2.32 and 5.82 g/1 in shake flask and in bioreactor cultures, respectively. Fed-batch cultivation, with controlled pH, increased the biomass gradually in culture, reaching 28.5 g/1 after 32 h cultivation. Beside the feasible use as a probiotic, the new strain also could be beneficial in the development of functional foods or novel food preservatives. To our knowledge, this is the first report of yeast with probiotic properties isolated from the Red Sea.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1867-1306
EI 1867-1314
PD MAR
PY 2018
VL 10
IS 1
BP 77
EP 88
DI 10.1007/s12602-017-9291-9
SC Biotechnology & Applied Microbiology; Microbiology
UT WOS:000429404800009
PM 28634812
ER

PT J
AU Santonja, M
   Pellan, L
   Piscart, C
AF Santonja, Mathieu
   Pellan, Laura
   Piscart, Christophe
TI Macroinvertebrate identity mediates the effects of litter quality and
   microbial conditioning on leaf litter recycling in temperate streams
SO ECOLOGY AND EVOLUTION
DT Article
DE feces production; freshwater macroinvertebrates; functional trait;
   litter consumption; temperate stream
ID ORGANIC-MATTER; DECOMPOSITION RATES; AQUATIC ECOSYSTEMS; SPECIES
   RICHNESS; GAMMARUS-PULEX; FECAL PELLETS; INVERTEBRATES; SHREDDERS;
   DETRITUS; TRAITS
AB Plant litter decomposition is an essential ecosystem function that contributes to carbon and nutrient cycling in streams. Aquatic shredders, mainly macroinvertebrates, can affect this process in various ways; they consume leaf litter, breaking it down into fragments and creating suitable habitats or resources for other organisms through the production of fine particulate organic matter (FPOM). However, measures of litter-feeding traits across a wide range of aquatic macroinvertebrates are still rare. Here, we assessed the contributions of 11 species of freshwater macroinvertebrates to litter decomposition, by measuring consumption rate, FPOM production, and assimilation rate of highly decomposable (Alnus glutinosa) or poorly decomposable (Quercus robur) leaf litter types. In general, an increase in the quality of litter improved the litter consumption rate, and fungal conditioning of the leaf litter increased both the litter consumption rate and FPOM production. Macroinvertebrates specializing in leaf litter consumption also appeared to be the most sensitive to shifts in litter quality and the conditioning process. Contrary to expectations, the conditioning process did not increase the assimilation of low-quality litter. There was a strong correlation between the relative consumption rate (RCR) of the two litter types, and the relative FPOM production (RFP) was strongly correlated to the RCR. These findings suggest a consistent relationship between RCR and macroinvertebrate identity that is not affected by litter quality, and that the RFP could be inferred from the RCR. The varying responses of the macroinvertebrate feeding traits to litter quality and the conditioning process suggest that the replacement of a shredder invertebrate species by another species could have major consequences for the decomposition process and the detritus-based food web in streams. Further studies onto the importance of invertebrate identity and the effects of litter quality in a variety of freshwater ecosystems are needed to understand the whole ecosystem functioning and to predict its response to environmental changes.
RI Santonja, Mathieu/L-5483-2017
OI Santonja, Mathieu/0000-0002-6322-6352
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 2045-7758
PD MAR
PY 2018
VL 8
IS 5
BP 2542
EP 2553
DI 10.1002/ece3.3790
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000426725900015
PM 29531675
ER

PT J
AU Pilotto, F
   Nilsson, C
   Polvi, LE
   McKie, BG
AF Pilotto, Francesca
   Nilsson, Christer
   Polvi, Lina E.
   McKie, Brendan G.
TI First signs of macroinvertebrate recovery following enhanced restoration
   of boreal streams used for timber floating
SO ECOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS
DT Article
DE community composition; enhanced restoration; heterogeneity;
   invertebrates; physical complexity; restoration intensity; river
   restoration; timber floating; time since restoration; traits
ID RESTORED HEADWATER STREAMS; RIVER RESTORATION; WATERSHED URBANIZATION;
   BENTHIC INVERTEBRATES; LARGE WOOD; LAND-USE; COMMUNITIES; HABITAT; FISH;
   BIODIVERSITY
AB Although ecological restoration generally succeeds in increasing physical heterogeneity, many projects fail to enhance biota. Researchers have suggested several possible explanations, including insufficient restoration intensity, or time-lags in ecological responses that prevent detection of significant changes in short-term monitoring programs. This study aims to evaluate whether benthic macroinvertebrate communities responded to an expanded set of stream restoration measures within a study period of one to five years after completion of the restoration project. We studied 10 forest streams in northern Sweden that were channelized in the past for timber floating. Managers subjected six of these streams to habitat restoration, on each of these we selected two reaches, located in close proximity but differing in restoration intensity. In basic restored reaches, the restoration managers broke up the channelized banks and returned cobbles and small boulders to the main channel. In enhanced restoration reaches, they added additional large wood and boulders to reaches previously subjected to basic restoration, and rehabilitated gravel beds. The remaining four streams were not restored, and thus represent the baseline impacted (channelized) condition. We surveyed stream benthic assemblages before the enhanced restoration (year 2010) and three times afterward between 2011 and 2015. Five years after restoration, macroinvertebrate assemblages at the enhanced restored reaches were more differentiated from channelized conditions than those at basic-restored reaches. This reflected increased relative abundances of the insect orders Ephemeroptera and Trichoptera and the bivalve molluscs Sphaeriidae and decreased relative abundances of Chironomidae (Diptera). Analysis of functional traits provided further insights on the mechanistic explanations driving the recovery, e.g., indicating that the augmented channel retention capacity at enhanced restored reaches favored taxa adapted to slow flow conditions and more effectively retained passive aquatic dispersers. The increased restoration intensity in enhanced restored reaches has resulted in shifts in the composition of benthic macroinvertebrate assemblages, including increases in more sensitive taxa. These shifts became fully apparent five years after the enhanced restoration. Our results emphasize the value of longer-term monitoring to assess ecological responses following restoration, and of undertaking additional restoration as a valuable management option for previously restored sites that failed to achieve biotic recovery.
OI Pilotto, Francesca/0000-0003-1848-3154
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 1051-0761
EI 1939-5582
PD MAR
PY 2018
VL 28
IS 2
BP 587
EP 597
DI 10.1002/eap.1672
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000426499100024
PM 29280235
ER

PT J
AU Neumann-Leitao, S
   Melo, PAMC
   Schwamborn, R
   Diaz, XFG
   Figueiredo, LGP
   Silva, AP
   Campelo, RPS
   de Melo, M
   Melo, NFAC
   Costa, AESF
   Araujo, M
   Veleda, DRA
   Moura, RL
   Thompson, F
AF Neumann-Leitao, Sigrid
   Melo, Pedro A. M. C.
   Schwamborn, Ralf
   Diaz, Xiomara F. G.
   Figueiredo, Lucas G. P.
   Silva, Andrea P.
   Campelo, Renata P. S.
   de Melo Junior, Mauro
   Melo, Nuno F. A. C.
   Costa, Alejandro E. S. F.
   Araujo, Moacyr
   Veleda, Doris R. A.
   Moura, Rodrigo L.
   Thompson, Fabiano
TI Zooplankton From a Reef System Under the Influence of the Amazon River
   Plume
SO FRONTIERS IN MICROBIOLOGY
DT Article
DE zooplankton; Amazon plume; reef system; copepod functional trait;
   diversity
ID TROPICAL NORTH-ATLANTIC; MARINE PLANKTONIC COPEPODS; SARGASSO SEA;
   FRONTAL ZONE; OCEAN; BIOMASS; MESOZOOPLANKTON; DIVERSITY; COMMUNITY;
   COASTAL
AB At the mouth of the Amazon River, a widespread carbonate ecosystem exists below the river plume, generating a hard-bottom reef (similar to 9500 km(2)) that includes mainly large sponges but also rhodolith beds. The mesozooplankton associated with the pelagic realm over the reef formation was characterized, considering the estuarine plume and oceanic influence. Vertical hauls were carried out using a standard plankton net with 200 mu m mesh size during September 2014. An indicator index was applied to express species importance as ecological indicators in community. Information on functional traits was gathered for the most abundant copepod species. Overall, 179 zooplankton taxa were recorded. Copepods were the richest (92 species), most diverse and most abundant group, whereas meroplankton were rare and less abundant. Species diversity (> 3.0 bits.ind(-1)) and evenness (> 0.6) were high, indicating a complex community. Small holoplanktonic species dominated the zooplankton, and the total density varied from 107.98 ind.m(-3) over the reef area to 2,609.24 ind.m(-3) in the estuarine plume, with a significant difference between coastal and oceanic areas. The most abundant copepods were the coastal species Oithona plumifera and Clausocalanus furcatus and early stages copepodites of Paracalanidae. The holoplanktonic Oikopleura, an important producer of mucous houses, was very abundant on the reefs. The indicator species index revealed three groups: (1) indicative of coastal waters under the influence of the estuarine plume [Euterpina acutifrons, Parvocalanus crassirostris, Oikopleura (Vexillaria) dioica and Hydromedusae]; (2) characterized coastal and oceanic conditions (Clausocalanus); (3) characterized the reef system (O. plumifera). Two major copepods functional groups were identified and sorted according to their trophic strategy and coastal-oceanic distribution. The species that dominated the coastal area and the area over the rhodolith beds are indicators of the estuarine plume and are mixed with species of the North Brazil Current. These species practically disappear offshore, where occur
OI Melo, Nuno/0000-0003-4163-4133
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 1664-302X
PD MAR 1
PY 2018
VL 9
AR 355
DI 10.3389/fmicb.2018.00355
SC Microbiology
UT WOS:000426373200001
PM 29545783
ER

PT J
AU Benedetti, F
   Vogt, M
   Righetti, D
   Guilhaumon, F
   Ayata, SD
AF Benedetti, Fabio
   Vogt, Meike
   Righetti, Damiano
   Guilhaumon, Francois
   Ayata, Sakina-Dorothee
TI Do functional groups of planktonic copepods differ in their ecological
   niches?
SO JOURNAL OF BIOGEOGRAPHY
DT Article
DE copepods; environmental niche; functional groups; trait biogeography;
   zooplankton
ID SPECIES DISTRIBUTION MODELS; ZOOPLANKTON FECAL PELLETS; NORTH-ATLANTIC;
   CLIMATE-CHANGE; CALANUS-FINMARCHICUS; MEDITERRANEAN SEA; MARINE
   ECOSYSTEM; PSEUDO-ABSENCES; OITHONA-SIMILIS; LIPID PUMP
AB Aim: To assess the degree of overlap between the environmental niches of marine planktonic copepods and test if the distribution of copepod functional groups differs across environmental gradients.
   Location: The Mediterranean Sea.
   Methods: Functional groups were defined based on clustering of functional traits in 106 marine copepod species using a multivariate ordination analysis. Functional traits included maximum body length, feeding mode, spawning strategy and trophic group. Simultaneously, the global distribution of the species was used to model their environmental niches with six environmental variables. For each of these predictors, four niche parameters were derived from the univariate response curve of each species to summarise their environmental preferences and ordinate the species in niche space through a PCA. Finally, the differences in the position in niche space of functional groups were tested with variance analysis.
   Results: We identified seven copepod functional groups with different distributions along the environmental gradients covered by our study. While carnivorous functional groups were affiliated with oligotrophic and tropical conditions, large and small current-feeding herbivores are associated with colder, more seasonally varying and productive conditions. Small cruising detritivores and other small current-feeding herbivores were not affiliated with specific conditions as their constituting species were scattered in niche space.
   Main conclusions: Since copepod functional groups occupy distinct ecological niches, ecosystem processes related to these groups are expected to vary across environmental gradients. Conditions favouring large current-feeding herbivores should allow for enhanced fluxes of energy and nutrients through Mediterranean Sea ecosystems, while such fluxes should be weakened where large carnivores and small passive ambush-feeding copepods dominate. Our study supports the development of trait-based zooplankton functional groups in marine ecosystem models.
OI Guilhaumon, Francois/0000-0003-4707-8932; Vogt,
   Meike/0000-0002-0608-1935; Benedetti, Fabio/0000-0002-7554-3646
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 0305-0270
EI 1365-2699
PD MAR
PY 2018
VL 45
IS 3
BP 604
EP 616
DI 10.1111/jbi.13166
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Physical Geography
UT WOS:000426508900008
ER

PT J
AU Vaughn, CC
AF Vaughn, Caryn C.
TI Ecosystem services provided by freshwater mussels
SO HYDROBIOLOGIA
DT Article
DE Biofiltration; Biomonitor; Habitat modification; Hotspot; Nutrient
   cycling and storage
ID FILTER-FEEDING BIVALVES; UNIONID MUSSELS; LARGE RIVER; RESOURCE SUBSIDY;
   EMERGING CONCERN; FUNCTIONAL-ROLE; SPECIES TRAITS; ZEBRA MUSSELS; OYSTER
   REEFS; DECAY-RATES
AB Ecosystem services are the benefits that humans derive from ecosystems. Freshwater mussels perform many important functions in aquatic ecosystems, which can in turn be framed as the ecosystem services that they contribute to or provide. These include supporting services such as nutrient recycling and storage, structural habitat, substrate and food web modification, and use as environmental monitors; regulating services such as water purification (biofiltration); and provisioning and cultural services including use as a food source, as tools and jewelry, and for spiritual enhancement. Mussel-provided ecosystem services are declining because of large declines in mussel abundance. Mussel propagation could be used to restore populations of common mussel species and their ecosystem services. We need much more quantification of the economic, social, and ecological value and magnitude of ecosystem services provided by mussels, across species, habitats, and environmental conditions, and scaled up to whole watersheds. In addition, we need tools that will allow us to value mussel ecosystem services in a way that is understandable to both the public and to policy makers.
TC 16
Z9 16
SN 0018-8158
EI 1573-5117
PD MAR
PY 2018
VL 810
IS 1
SI SI
BP 15
EP 27
DI 10.1007/s10750-017-3139-x
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000425296400002
ER

PT J
AU Tirado, C
   Trujillo, D
   Pizarro-Araya, J
   Alfaro, FM
   Gonzalez, S
   Carretero, MA
AF Tirado, Carlos
   Trujillo, Daniel
   Pizarro-Araya, Jaime
   Alfaro, Fermin M.
   Gonzalez, Sylvana
   Carretero, Miguel A.
TI Ecophysiological traits and activity patterns of coleopterans from
   Atacama Desert provide clues to the functional responses of small
   ectotherms to climate change
SO JOURNAL OF ARID ENVIRONMENTS
DT Article
DE Thermoregulation; Water loss; Activity; Deserts; Climate change;
   Functional response
ID TRANSITIONAL COASTAL DESERT; TRANSPIRATORY WATER-LOSS; TENEBRIONID
   BEETLES; EPIGEAN TENEBRIONIDS; CHILE; THERMOREGULATION; MENEVILLE;
   ABUNDANCE; BEHAVIOR; IMPACTS
AB There is an increasing contribution of ecophysiology in community ecology and climate change contexts. As such, functional patterns under extreme water and temperature restrictions in deserts can provide inference of the responses of small ectotherms to climate change. However disentangling the interactive effects between both factors requires experimental evidence. Here we took advantage of a flowering desert episode promoting a population bloom in Gyriosomus (Coleoptera: Tenebrionidae) beetles from Atacama Desert to test this interactive hypothesis. By systematically sampling two sympatric Gyriosomus species, we analyzed the differences in activity, body temperature and water loss rate. Body size regardless the species or sex was responsible for the observed behavioral and ecophysiological patterns. Large coleopterans (females > males, G. kingi > G. pianicollis) lost less water and were active at higher temperatures making their bimodal diel activity less marked. Beyond the confirmation of the crucial role of water availability and inactivity in arid ecosystems, these results suggest that functional responses of small ectotherms to climate change will be size-dependent while advocate for integrating hydric and thermal data to better understand this transition.
RI Carretero, Miguel/A-1472-2013; Alfaro, Fermin M./J-5049-2016
OI Carretero, Miguel/0000-0002-2335-7198; 
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0140-1963
EI 1095-922X
PD MAR
PY 2018
VL 150
BP 21
EP 27
DI 10.1016/j.jaridenv.2017.11.016
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000424718100004
ER

PT J
AU Lucey, NM
   Lombardi, C
   Florio, M
   Rundle, SD
   Calosi, P
   Gambi, MC
AF Lucey, Noelle M.
   Lombardi, Chiara
   Florio, Maurizio
   Rundle, Simon D.
   Calosi, Piero
   Gambi, Maria Cristina
TI A comparison of life-history traits in calcifying Spirorbinae
   polychaetes living along natural pH gradients
SO MARINE ECOLOGY PROGRESS SERIES
DT Article
DE Ocean acidification; Calcifiers; Settlement success; Fecundity;
   Early-life survival; Serpulidae; Population resilience
ID GASTROPOD CREPIPATELLA-DILATATA; OCEAN ACIDIFICATION;
   POSIDONIA-OCEANICA; MARINE-INVERTEBRATES; LOCAL ADAPTATION; GLOBAL
   CHANGE; SETTLEMENT; RESPONSES; EVOLUTION; SEAWATER
AB Low-pH vent systems are ideal natural laboratories to study the consequences of long-term low-pH exposure on marine species and thus identify life-history traits associated with low-pH tolerance. This knowledge can help to inform predictions on which types of species may be less vulnerable in future ocean acidification (OA) scenarios. Accordingly, we investigated how traits of calcifying polychaete species (Serpulidae, Spirorbinae) varied with pH using a functional trait analysis at 2 natural pH gradients around the Castello Aragonese islet off Ischia, Italy. We first observed the distribution and abundance patterns of all calcifying polychaete epiphytes in the canopy of Posidonia oceanica seagrass across these gradients. We then used laboratory trials to compare fecundity, settlement success, and juvenile survival in the dominant species from a control (Pileolaria militaris Claparede, 1870) and a low-pH site (Simplaria sp.). We found significantly higher reproductive output, juvenile settlement rates, and juvenile survival in Simplaria sp. individuals from the low-pH site, compared to P. militaris individuals from control pH sites, when observed in their respective in situ pH conditions. Our results suggest that tolerance to low pH may result, in part, from traits associated with successful reproduction and rapid settlement under low-pH conditions. This finding implies that other species with similar life-history traits may respond similarly, and should be targeted for future OA tolerance research.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0171-8630
EI 1616-1599
PD FEB 23
PY 2018
VL 589
BP 141
EP 152
DI 10.3354/meps12453
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology;
   Oceanography
UT WOS:000426258800011
ER

PT J
AU Kontopoulos, DG
   Garcia-Carreras, B
   Sal, S
   Smith, TP
   Pawar, S
AF Kontopoulos, Dimitrios-Georgios
   Garcia-Carreras, Bernardo
   Sal, Sofia
   Smith, Thomas P.
   Pawar, Samraat
TI Use and misuse of temperature normalisation in meta-analyses of thermal
   responses of biological traits
SO PEERJ
DT Article
DE Sharpe-Schoolfield; Thermal response; Physiology; Temperature
ID MARINE-PHYTOPLANKTON; METABOLIC THEORY; AEDES-AEGYPTI; GROWTH-RATES;
   DEPENDENCE; ADAPTATION; PERFORMANCE; ENZYME; SCALE; COMPENSATION
AB There is currently unprecedented interest in quantifying variation in thermal physiology among organisms, especially in order to understand and predict the biological impacts of climate change. A key parameter in this quantification of thermal physiology is the performance or value of a rate, across individuals or species, at a common temperature (temperature normalisation). An increasingly popular model for fitting thermal performance curves to data-the Sharpe-Schoolfield equation-can yield strongly inflated estimates of temperature-normalised rate values. These deviations occur whenever a key thermodynamic assumption of the model is violated, i.e., when the enzyme governing the performance of the rate is not fully functional at the chosen reference temperature. Using data on 1,758 thermal performance curves across a wide range of species, we identify the conditions that exacerbate this inflation. We then demonstrate that these biases can compromise tests to detect metabolic cold adaptation, which requires comparison of fitness or rate performance of different species or genotypes at some fixed low temperature. Finally, we suggest alternative methods for obtaining unbiased estimates of temperature-normalised rate values for meta-analyses of thermal performance across species in climate change impact studies.
OI Kontopoulos, Dimitrios - Georgios/0000-0002-5082-1929
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 2167-8359
PD FEB 9
PY 2018
VL 6
AR e4363
DI 10.7717/peerj.4363
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000425027900007
PM 29441242
ER

PT J
AU Sablok, G
   Hayward, RJ
   Davey, PA
   Santos, RP
   Schliep, M
   Larkum, A
   Pernice, M
   Dolferus, R
   Ralph, PJ
AF Sablok, Gaurav
   Hayward, Regan J.
   Davey, Peter A.
   Santos, Rosiane P.
   Schliep, Martin
   Larkum, Anthony
   Pernice, Mathieu
   Dolferus, Rudy
   Ralph, Peter J.
TI SeagrassDB: An open-source transcriptomics landscape for
   phylogenetically profiled seagrasses and aquatic plants
SO SCIENTIFIC REPORTS
DT Article
ID ZOSTERA-MARINA; RNA-SEQ; POSIDONIA-OCEANICA; CYMODOCEA-NODOSA;
   PLASMA-MEMBRANE; GENE-EXPRESSION; GENOME; ARABIDOPSIS; PROTEIN;
   ACTIVATION
AB Seagrasses and aquatic plants are important clades of higher plants, significant for carbon sequestration and marine ecological restoration. They are valuable in the sense that they allow us to understand how plants have developed traits to adapt to high salinity and photosynthetically challenged environments. Here, we present a large-scale phylogenetically profiled transcriptomics repository covering seagrasses and aquatic plants. SeagrassDB encompasses a total of 1,052,262 unigenes with a minimum and maximum contig length of 8,831 bp and 16,705 bp respectively. SeagrassDB provides access to 34,455 transcription factors, 470,568 PFAM domains, 382,528 prosite models and 482,121 InterPro domains across 9 species. SeagrassDB allows for the comparative gene mining using BLAST-based approaches and subsequent unigenes sequence retrieval with associated features such as expression (FPKM values), gene ontologies, functional assignments, family level classification, Interpro domains, KEGG orthology (KO), transcription factors and prosite information. SeagrassDB is available to the scientific community for exploring the functional genic landscape of seagrass and aquatic plants at: http://115.146.91.129/index.php.
RI Ralph, Peter/C-5029-2009
OI Ralph, Peter/0000-0002-3103-7346; Pernice, Mathieu/0000-0002-3431-2104;
   Hayward, Regan/0000-0002-6300-3271; de Paula Santos,
   Rosiane/0000-0003-3233-6863
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 2045-2322
PD FEB 9
PY 2018
VL 8
AR 2749
DI 10.1038/s41598-017-18782-0
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000424634000003
PM 29426939
ER

PT J
AU Cardeccia, A
   Marchini, A
   Occhipinti-Ambrogi, A
   Galil, B
   Gollasch, S
   Minchin, D
   Narscius, A
   Olenin, S
   Ojaveer, H
AF Cardeccia, Alice
   Marchini, Agnese
   Occhipinti-Ambrogi, Anna
   Galil, Bella
   Gollasch, Stephan
   Minchin, Dan
   Narscius, Aleksas
   Olenin, Sergej
   Ojaveer, Henn
TI Assessing biological invasions in European Seas: Biological traits of
   the most widespread non-indigenous species
SO ESTUARINE COASTAL AND SHELF SCIENCE
DT Article
DE Non indigenous species; Biological trait profile; Marine organisms; Life
   cycle; Feeding behaviour
ID FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; ANALYSIS BTA; FEEDING ECOLOGY; PERFECT INVADER;
   FRESH-WATER; NORTH-SEA; INVASIVENESS; DECAPODA; PLANTS; ESTABLISHMENT
AB The biological traits of the sixty-eight most widespread multicellular non-indigenous species (MWNIS) in European Seas: Baltic Sea, Western European Margin of the Atlantic Ocean and the Mediterranean Sea were examined. Data for nine biological traits was analyzed, and a total of 41 separate categories were used to describe the biological and ecological functions of these NIS.
   Our findings show that high dispersal ability, high reproductive rate and ecological generalization are the biological traits commonly associated with MWNIS. The functional groups that describe most of the 68 MWNIS are: photoautotrophic, zoobenthic (both sessile and motile) and nektonic predatory species. However, these 'most widespread' species comprise a wide range of taxa and biological trait profiles; thereby a clear "identikit of a perfect invader" for marine and brackish environments is difficult to define. Some traits, for example: "life form", "feeding method" and "mobility", feature multiple behaviours and strategies. Even species introduced by a single pathway, e.g. vessels, feature diverse biological trait profiles.
   MWNIS likely to impact community organization, structure and diversity are often associated with brackish environments. For many traits ("life form", "sociability", "reproductive type", "reproductive frequency", "haploid and diploid dispersal" and "mobility"), the categories mostly expressed by the impact-causing MWNIS do not differ substantially from the whole set of MWNIS. (C) 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
RI Ojaveer, Henn/K-2160-2016
OI Ojaveer, Henn/0000-0003-2742-6063; OCCHIPINTI, ANNA
   CARMEN/0000-0002-5737-8317; cardoso, alexandrina/0000-0002-9351-6684;
   Marchini, Agnese/0000-0003-4580-0522; Olenin, Sergej/0000-0002-0773-1442
TC 5
Z9 5
SN 0272-7714
EI 1096-0015
PD FEB 5
PY 2018
VL 201
SI SI
BP 17
EP 28
DI 10.1016/j.ecss.2016.02.014
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000427210100003
ER

PT J
AU Sand-Jensen, K
   Bruun, HH
   Nielsen, TF
   Christiansen, DM
   Hartvig, P
   Schou, JC
   Baastrup-Spohr, L
AF Sand-Jensen, Kaj
   Bruun, Hans Henrik
   Nielsen, Tora Finderup
   Christiansen, Ditte M.
   Hartvig, Per
   Schou, Jens C.
   Baastrup-Spohr, Lars
TI The Dangers of Being a Small, Oligotrophic and Light Demanding
   Freshwater Plant across a Spatial and Historical Eutrophication Gradient
   in Southern Scandinavia
SO FRONTIERS IN PLANT SCIENCE
DT Article
DE aquatic plants; acidification; biodiversity; environmental change;
   eutrophication; historical changes; Southern Scandinavia; species traits
ID MACROPHYTE COMMUNITIES; AQUATIC MACROPHYTES; LITTORELLA-UNIFLORA; LEVEL
   FLUCTUATIONS; INORGANIC CARBON; EUROPEAN LAKES; DANISH LAKES; RICHNESS;
   ACIDIFICATION; VEGETATION
AB European freshwater habitats have experienced a severe loss of plant diversity, regionally and locally, over the last century or more. One important and well-established driver of change is eutrophication, which has increased with rising population density and agricultural intensification. However, reduced disturbance of lake margins may have played an additional key role. The geographical variation in water chemistry, which has set the scene for-and interacted with-anthropogenic impact, is much less well understood. We took advantage of some recently completed regional plant distribution surveys, relying on hundreds of skilled citizen scientists, and analyzed the hydrophyte richness to environment relations in five contiguous South-Scandinavian regions. For three of the regions, we also assessed changes to the freshwater flora over the latest 50-80 years. We found a considerable variation in background total phosphorus concentrations and alkalinity, both within and between regions. The prevalence of functional groups differed between regions in accordance with the environmental conditions and the species' tolerance to turbid waters. Similarly, the historical changes within regions followed the same trend in correspondence to the altered environmental conditions over time. Small submerged species decreased relative to tall submerged and floating-leaved species along the regional and historical eutrophication gradients. These changes were accompanied by systematically greater relative abundance of species of higher phosphorus prevalence. We conclude that species traits in close correspondence with anthropogenic impacts are the main determinants of local, regional and historical changes of species distribution and occupancy, while pure biogeography plays a minor role. Conservation measures, such as re-oligotrophication and re-established disturbance regimes through grazing and water level fluctuations, may help reduce the tall reed vegetation, restore the former richness of the freshwater flora and safeguard red-listed species, although extended time delays are anticipated in nutrient-rich regions, in which species only survive at minute abundance in isolated refugia.
RI Bruun, Hans Henrik/C-4476-2008; Baastrup-Spohr, Lars/K-4696-2014
OI Bruun, Hans Henrik/0000-0003-0674-2577; Baastrup-Spohr,
   Lars/0000-0001-8382-984X
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 1664-462X
PD FEB 2
PY 2018
VL 9
AR 66
DI 10.3389/fpls.2018.00066
SC Plant Sciences
UT WOS:000423980100001
PM 29456545
ER

PT J
AU Berthelsen, A
   Atalah, J
   Clark, D
   Goodwin, E
   Patterson, M
   Sinner, J
AF Berthelsen, A.
   Atalah, J.
   Clark, D.
   Goodwin, E.
   Patterson, M.
   Sinner, J.
TI Relationships between biotic indices, multiple stressors and natural
   variability in New Zealand estuaries
SO ECOLOGICAL INDICATORS
DT Article
DE Biotic index; Macrofauna; Estuary; Ecological health; Estuary type;
   Natural variation
ID ECOLOGICAL COMMUNITY-HEALTH; BENTHIC INDEX; QUALITY ASSESSMENT;
   ENVIRONMENTAL INDICATORS; MACROFAUNAL ASSEMBLAGES; CLASSIFICATION
   SCHEMES; SEASONAL VARIABILITY; TASMANIAN ESTUARIES; ECOSYSTEM HEALTH;
   MARINE SYSTEMS
AB In response to the need to assess the ecological quality or health of marine benthic habitats, there has been a proliferation of biotic indices based on soft sediment macrofaunal communities. While shown to be useful in areas where they have been developed, some indices may not be readily transferrable to other regions due to differences in species ecology or composition, stressor type or magnitude, and natural variability. Using a national New Zealand dataset compiled from estuary monitoring data for 2001-2016, we used linear mixed models to determine the effect of multiple stressors (sediment mud content, metals and total phosphorus) and natural variability (associated with space, estuary type and time) on nine indices developed in New Zealand and overseas. The Richness-Integrated AZTI Marine Biotic Index (RI-AMBI), a modification of a popular overseas biotic index, had the most variation explained by stressors overall (marginal pseudo-R-2 = 0.22 compared to <= 0.15 for all other indices). This variation was primarily explained by a single stressor, sediment mud content, which is the dominant stressor in New Zealand estuaries. However, although the overall variation explained by stressors was lower for all other indices, multiple, rather than single, stressors had significant effects on some indices. For example all three stressors had a significant effect on the Traits Based Index, and the variation explained by metals was highest for this index. Relatively high amounts of natural and unexplained variation for all indices suggested that further understanding is required before operational implementation of indices at a national scale. Thus, the use of more than one index, i.e. a weight of evidence approach, is suggested to minimise uncertainty related to inaccuracy and misclassification of ecological health in New Zealand estuaries.
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 1470-160X
EI 1872-7034
PD FEB
PY 2018
VL 85
BP 634
EP 643
DI 10.1016/j.ecolind.2017.10.060
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000430634500066
ER

PT J
AU Machado, AM
   Almeida, T
   Mucientes, G
   Esteves, PJ
   Verissimo, A
   Castro, LFC
AF Machado, Andre M.
   Almeida, Tereza
   Mucientes, Gonzalo
   Esteves, Pedro J.
   Verissimo, Ana
   Castro, L. Filipe C.
TI De novo assembly of the kidney and spleen transcriptomes of the
   cosmopolitan blue shark, Prionace glauca
SO MARINE GENOMICS
DT Article
DE RNA-Seq; Carcharhinids; Oceanic pelagic sharks; Highly migratory;
   Chondrichthyes; Spleen and kidney
ID GENOME
AB Cartilaginous fishes (sharks, rays and chimaeras) comprise a highly diversified group of basal vertebrates occupying a plethora of ecological aquatic niches. They represent critical components of marine ecosystems and food webs, although numerous species are threatened and almost half are poorly known. Genomic resources emerging from this basal jawed vertebrate group have offered valuable insights into the evolution of vertebrate specific traits. Yet, the taxon remains largely understudied. Here, we generated the first high-quality de novo assembly of kidney and spleen transcriptomes of the blue shark (Prionace glauca). A total of 32,917,412 and 52,666,542 reads were obtained for spleen and kidney, respectively, using RNA-Seq Illumina technology. De novo multi-tissue assembly resulted in 97,317 unigenes with an N50 of 1975 bp, in which 87,571 were assigned to a particular tissue or combination of tissues based on the sequencing read mapping. Functional annotation generated 28,564 and 19,854 open reading frames in spleen and kidney, respectively. This dataset provides a significant resource for physiological and evolutionary studies, namely into the unique osmoregulatory system of Chondrichthyes and the evolution of the immune system in vertebrates.
RI Mucientes Sandoval, Gonzalo/A-1057-2009; Verissimo, Ana/E-4487-2011
OI Mucientes Sandoval, Gonzalo/0000-0001-6650-3020; Verissimo,
   Ana/0000-0003-3396-9822; Machado, Andre M./0000-0002-6857-7581; Esteves,
   Pedro/0000-0002-6055-8298
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 1874-7787
EI 1876-7478
PD FEB
PY 2018
VL 37
BP 50
EP 53
DI 10.1016/j.margen.2017.11.009
SC Genetics & Heredity; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000428974700010
ER

PT J
AU Xu, YA
   Fan, XP
   Warren, A
   Zhang, LQ
   Xu, HL
AF Xu, Yuan
   Fan, Xinpeng
   Warren, Alan
   Zhang, Liquan
   Xu, Henglong
TI Functional diversity of benthic ciliate communities in response to
   environmental gradients in a wetland of Yangtze Estuary, China
SO MARINE POLLUTION BULLETIN
DT Article
DE Ecosystem function; Estuarine wetland; Functional traits; Marine
   protozoans
ID PROTOZOAN COMMUNITIES; BIOLOGICAL TRAITS; SEDIMENTS; SEA; ECOSYSTEMS;
   DYNAMICS; PATTERNS
AB Researches on the functional diversity of benthic ecosystems have mainly focused on macrofauna, and studies on functional structure of ciliate communities have been based only on trophic- or size-groups. Current research was carried out on the changing patterns of classical and functional diversity of benthic ciliates in response to environmental gradients at three sites in a wetland in Yangtze Estuary. The results showed that changes of environmental factors (e.g. salinity, sediment grain size and hydrodynamic conditions) in the Yangtze Estuary induce variability in species composition and functional trait distribution. Furthermore, increased species richness and diversity did not lead to significant changes in functional diversity due to functional redundancy. However, salt water intrusion of Yangtze Estuary during the dry season could cause reduced functional diversity of ciliate communities. Current study provides the first insight into the functional diversity of ciliate communities in response to environmental gradients.
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0025-326X
EI 1879-3363
PD FEB
PY 2018
VL 127
BP 726
EP 732
DI 10.1016/j.marpolbul.2017.12.068
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000427332900080
PM 29475716
ER

PT J
AU Visconti, A
   Caroni, R
   Rawcliffe, R
   Fadda, A
   Piscia, R
   Manca, M
AF Visconti, Anna
   Caroni, Rossana
   Rawcliffe, Ruth
   Fadda, Amedeo
   Piscia, Roberta
   Manca, Marina
TI Defining Seasonal Functional Traits of a Freshwater Zooplankton
   Community Using delta C-13 and delta N-15 Stable Isotope Analysis
SO WATER
DT Article
DE functional diversity; zooplankton; seasonality; stable isotope analysis;
   trophic interactions
ID PELAGIC FOOD-WEB; TROPHIC INTERACTIONS; ORGANIC-CARBON; LAGO MAGGIORE;
   DIVERSITY; LAKE; ECOSYSTEM; DIET; PATTERNS; NITROGEN
AB Functional-based approaches are increasingly being used to define the functional diversity of aquatic ecosystems. In this study, we proposed the use of delta C-13 and delta N-15 stable isotopes as a proxy of zooplankton functional traits in Lake Maggiore, a large, deep subalpine Italian lake. We analyzed the seasonal pattern of delta C-13 and delta N-15 signatures of different crustacean zooplankton taxa to determine food sources, preferred habitats, and trophic positions of species throughout one year. The cladocerans Daphnia longispina galeata gr., Diaphanosoma brachyurum, and Eubosmina longispina were grouped into a primary consumer functional group from their delta C-13 and delta N-15 isotopic signatures, but while the former two species shared the same food sources, the latter exhibited a more selective feeding strategy. Cyclopoid copepods occupied a distinct functional group from the other secondary consumers, being the most N-15 enriched group in the lake. The delta N-15 signature of calanoid copepods showed trophic enrichment in comparison to Daphnia and Eubosmina and linear mixing model results confirmed a predator-prey relationship. In our study, we have demonstrated that the use of delta C-13 and delta N-15 stable isotopes represented an effective tool to define ecological roles of freshwater zooplankton species and to determine functional diversity in a lake.
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 2073-4441
PD FEB
PY 2018
VL 10
IS 2
AR 108
DI 10.3390/w10020108
SC Water Resources
UT WOS:000426775500018
ER

PT J
AU Hernandez, LP
   Adriaens, D
   Martin, CH
   Wainwright, PC
   Masschaele, B
   Dierick, M
AF Hernandez, Luz Patricia
   Adriaens, Dominique
   Martin, Christopher H.
   Wainwright, Peter C.
   Masschaele, Bert
   Dierick, Manuel
TI Building trophic specializations that result in substantial niche
   partitioning within a young adaptive radiation
SO JOURNAL OF ANATOMY
DT Article
DE adductor mandibulae; Cyprinodon; durophagy; functional morphology; jaw;
   lepidophagy; scale-eating
ID REMARKABLE SPECIES FLOCK; SAN-SALVADOR ISLAND; CYPRINODONTIFORM FISHES;
   EVOLUTIONARY NOVELTY; PUPFISHES; MECHANISM; DIVERSIFICATION; TELEOSTEI;
   RATES; POPULATIONS
AB Dietary partitioning often accompanies the increased morphological diversity seen during adaptive radiations within aquatic systems. While such niche partitioning would be expected in older radiations, it is unclear how significant morphological divergence occurs within a shorter time period. Here we show how differential growth in key elements of the feeding mechanism can bring about pronounced functional differences among closely related species. An incredibly young adaptive radiation of three Cyprinodon species residing within hypersaline lakes in San Salvador Island, Bahamas, has recently been described. Characterized by distinct head shapes, gut content analyses revealed three discrete feeding modes in these species: basal detritivory as well as derived durophagy and lepidophagy (scale-feeding). We dissected, cleared and stained, and micro-CT scanned species to assess functionally relevant differences in craniofacial musculoskeletal elements. The widespread feeding mode previously described for cyprinodontiforms, in which the force of the bite may be secondary to the requisite dexterity needed to pick at food items, is modified within both the scale specialist and the durophagous species. While the scale specialist has greatly emphasized maxillary retraction, using it to overcome the poor mechanical advantage associated with scaleeating, the durophage has instead stabilized the maxilla. In all species the bulk of the adductor musculature is composed of AM A1. However, the combined masses of both adductor mandibulae (AM) A1 and A3 in the scale specialist were five times that of the other species, showing the importance of growth in functional divergence. The scale specialist combines plesiomorphic jaw mechanisms with both a hypertrophied AM A1 and a slightly modified maxillary anatomy (with substantial functional implications) to generate a bite that is both strong and allows a wide range of motion in the upper jaw, two attributes that normally tradeoff mechanically. Thus, a significant feeding innovation (scale-eating, rarely seen in fishes) may evolve based largely on allometric changes in ancestral structures. Alternatively, the durophage shows reduced growth with foreshortened jaws that are stabilized by an immobile maxilla. Overall, scale specialists showed the most divergent morphology, suggesting that selection for scale-biting might be stronger or act on a greater number of traits than selection for either detritivory or durophagy. The scale specialist has colonized an adaptive peak that few lineages have climbed. Thus, heterochronic changes in growth can quickly produce functionally relevant change among closely related species.
OI Hernandez, Luz Patricia/0000-0001-9616-7777
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 0021-8782
EI 1469-7580
PD FEB
PY 2018
VL 232
IS 2
BP 173
EP 185
DI 10.1111/joa.12742
SC Anatomy & Morphology
UT WOS:000425850800001
PM 29161774
ER

PT J
AU Teichert, N
   Lepage, M
   Chevillot, X
   Lobry, J
AF Teichert, Nils
   Lepage, Mario
   Chevillot, Xavier
   Lobry, Jeremy
TI Environmental drivers of taxonomic, functional and phylogenetic
   diversity (alpha, beta and gamma components) in estuarine fish
   communities
SO JOURNAL OF BIOGEOGRAPHY
DT Article
DE alpha diversity; beta diversity; biodiversity; environmental conditions;
   estuary; fish assemblage; functional; gamma diversity; phylogenetic;
   taxonomic; traits
ID CONSERVATION BIOLOGY; NICHE CONSERVATISM; SPECIES-DIVERSITY; GLOBAL
   PATTERNS; BIODIVERSITY; ECOLOGY; ASSEMBLAGES; MODELS; DISTRIBUTIONS;
   PREDICTORS
AB Aim: We applied a diversity partitioning approach to identify the influence of multiple environmental factors on taxonomic, functional and phylogenetic diversity of estuarine fish assemblages at different spatial scales. Our aim was to determine (1) how variation in gamma-diversity (estuary scale) is supported by changes in alpha- (local scale) and beta-components (dissimilarity between these two scales) for the three diversity facets and (2) how these diversity measures are related to biogeographic, hydroclimatic, marine, estuarine and land cover conditions.
   Location: French estuaries, North East Atlantic.
   Taxon: Fish communities.
   Methods: Fish assemblages were sampled using standardized beam trawl surveys in 32 estuaries during spring and autumn (period 2005-2016). The Rao's quadratic entropy was used to decompose the gamma-diversity into alpha-diversity and beta-diversity. For the three diversity facets, we used linear mixed models (LMMs) to determine the strength of the relationships between alpha-, beta- and gamma-diversities. Then, LMMs were applied to identify which environmental factors were the best predictors of diversity patterns.
   Results: Variability in gamma-diversity is better explained by beta-diversity than by local (alpha-) diversity for the three diversity facets. The relationship between gamma- and alpha-diversity revealed a saturation effect for both taxonomic and phylogenetic indices. The influence of the five categories of explanatory variables differed depending on the diversity facet and component. We found that marine conditions were the primary drivers of phylogenetic and functional alpha-diversity, whereas beta-diversity was mainly influenced by estuarine characteristics. LMMs also evidenced a role of biogeographic, hydroclimatic and land cover conditions beta-diversity.
   Main conclusions: Our results support the statement that fish diversity is chiefly supported by changes in species composition along estuarine gradients, while functional dissimilarity is limited in space and time. Although diversity is influenced by numerous environmental factors, the ecological connection with the marine ecosystem appears as a key component to promote local diversity.
RI Lepage, Mario/J-7110-2012
OI Lepage, Mario/0000-0002-8996-5305; Chevillot,
   Xavier/0000-0002-4008-1859; Teichert, Nils/0000-0002-8873-9613
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0305-0270
EI 1365-2699
PD FEB
PY 2018
VL 45
IS 2
BP 406
EP 417
DI 10.1111/jbi.13133
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Physical Geography
UT WOS:000424642900012
ER

PT J
AU Peter, DH
   Sardy, S
   Rodriguez, JD
   Castella, E
   Slaveykova, VI
AF Peter, Dorothea Hug
   Sardy, Sylvain
   Rodriguez, Jairo Diaz
   Castella, Emmanuel
   Slaveykova, Vera I.
TI Modeling whole body trace metal concentrations in aquatic invertebrate
   communities: A trait-based approach
SO ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION
DT Article
DE Trace elements; Aquatic invertebrates; Traits; Bioaccumulation; Riverine
   floodplain
ID BENTHIC MACROINVERTEBRATES; FLOODPLAIN CHANNELS; RIVER FLOODPLAIN;
   HEAVY-METALS; BIOACCUMULATION; ACCUMULATION; REGRESSION; INSECTS;
   IMPROVEMENT; SPECIATION
AB Trace metal risk assessment and environmental quality standard definition require realistic models that quantify metal exposure and accumulation by biota. In the present study we propose a novel trait-based approach to predict whole body concentrations of metals in aquatic invertebrates from concentrations measured in different environmental compartments. Field data from a large riverine floodplain was used to calibrate and test the model. The prediction performance of the trait-based model was unbiased and uncertainty was below the twofold of measured concentrations for the four studied metals (Ni, Cu, Cd, Pb). The relative contribution of feeding, respiration and locomotion patterns as well as metal concentrations in three environmental compartments provided insights into the importance of different uptake pathways. The relation with the sediment (i.e., to what degree taxa live in or directly on the sediment) was shown to be the most important trait to predict metal accumulation. Overall, this study demonstrated the potential use of bioecological traits for the modeling of whole body metal concentrations of entire aquatic invertebrate communities. (C) 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
RI Slaveykova, Vera/A-1469-2016
OI Slaveykova, Vera/0000-0002-8361-2509
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0269-7491
EI 1873-6424
PD FEB
PY 2018
VL 233
BP 419
EP 428
DI 10.1016/j.envpol.2017.10.044
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000424177000045
PM 29100179
ER

PT J
AU Materatski, P
   Ribeiro, R
   Moreira-Santos, M
   Sousa, JP
   Adao, H
AF Materatski, Patrick
   Ribeiro, Rui
   Moreira-Santos, Matilde
   Sousa, Jose Paulo
   Adao, Helena
TI Nematode biomass and morphometric attributes as descriptors during a
   major Zostera noltii collapse
SO MARINE BIOLOGY
DT Article
ID FREE-LIVING NEMATODES; COMMUNITY STRUCTURE; SPATIAL VARIABILITY;
   MEIOBENTHIC COMMUNITIES; VERTICAL-DISTRIBUTION; UNVEGETATED HABITATS;
   INTERTIDAL NEMATODES; SPECIES-DIVERSITY; MARINE NEMATODES; SEAGRASS BEDS
AB Benthic nematodes are recognized as suitable organisms to provide valuable information on the potential ecological effects of natural and anthropogenic disturbances in aquatic ecosystems. The biomass and morphometric attributes of nematodes (body length, width, and length/width) collected in the Mira estuary (SW Portugal) were analysed before the collapse and during the natural recovery process of the Zostera noltii bed. In addition, their relationship with community characteristics and environmental variables was studied. Moreover, biomass and morphometric attributes were investigated for their potential use as a complementary tool to the classical descriptor "density" (from which several other descriptors are derived) when studying nematodes as biological indicators. Nematode biomass and morphometric attributes proved to be valuable as correlate with the environmental changes associated with the Z. noltii collapse. High values of nematode biomass, length, width, and length/width ratio were observed during the early recovery process of Z. noltii, contrasting with nematode densities, which showed consistently higher values before the collapse. These findings suggest that biomass and morphometric attributes indicate a functional adaptation of nematode communities to the new environmental conditions in the early recovery process of Z. noltii. Therefore, these traits may be used to provide complementary information to standing stocks of nematode assemblages so as to assess ecological changes over spatial and temporal scales in marine ecosystems, particularly within seagrass bed habitats.
OI Materatski, Patrick/0000-0001-5769-1963
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0025-3162
EI 1432-1793
PD FEB
PY 2018
VL 165
IS 2
DI 10.1007/s00227-018-3283-5
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000424326200005
ER

PT J
AU Wilson, SK
   Depcyznski, M
   Fisher, R
   Holmes, TH
   Noble, MM
   Radford, BT
   Rule, M
   Shedrawi, G
   Tinkler, P
   Fulton, CJ
AF Wilson, Shaun K.
   Depcyznski, Martial
   Fisher, Rebecca
   Holmes, Thomas H.
   Noble, Mae M.
   Radford, Ben T.
   Rule, Michael
   Shedrawi, George
   Tinkler, Paul
   Fulton, Christopher J.
TI Climatic forcing and larval dispersal capabilities shape the
   replenishment of fishes and their habitat-forming biota on a tropical
   coral reef
SO ECOLOGY AND EVOLUTION
DT Article
DE climate forcing; larval behavior; nursery habitats; population dynamics
ID GREAT-BARRIER-REEF; CRITICAL SWIMMING SPEED; EASTERN PACIFIC-OCEAN;
   WESTERN ROCK LOBSTER; LIFE-HISTORY TRAITS; LEEUWIN CURRENT; NURSERY
   HABITAT; SETTLEMENT-MARKS; FRINGING-REEF; RECRUITMENT
AB Fluctuations in marine populations often relate to the supply of recruits by oceanic currents. Variation in these currents is typically driven by large-scale changes in climate, in particular ENSO (El Nino Southern Oscillation). The dependence on large-scale climatic changes may, however, be modified by early life history traits of marine taxa. Based on eight years of annual surveys, along 150km of coastline, we examined how ENSO influenced abundance of juvenile fish, coral spat, and canopy-forming macroalgae. We then investigated what traits make populations of some fish families more reliant on the ENSO relationship than others. Abundance of juvenile fish and coral recruits was generally positively correlated with the Southern Oscillation Index (SOI), higher densities recorded during La Nina years, when the ENSO-influenced Leeuwin Current is stronger and sea surface temperature higher. The relationship is typically positive and stronger among fish families with shorter pelagic larval durations and stronger swimming abilities. The relationship is also stronger at sites on the coral back reef, although the strongest of all relationships were among the lethrinids (r=.9), siganids (r=.9), and mullids (r=.8), which recruit to macroalgal meadows in the lagoon. ENSO effects on habitat seem to moderate SOI-juvenile abundance relationship. Macroalgal canopies are higher during La Nina years, providing more favorable habitat for juvenile fish and strengthening the SOI effect on juvenile abundance. Conversely, loss of coral following a La Nina-related heat wave may have compromised postsettlement survival of coral dependent species, weakening the influence of SOI on their abundance. This assessment of ENSO effects on tropical fish and habitat-forming biota and how it is mediated by functional ecology improves our ability to predict and manage changes in the replenishment of marine populations.
RI Fulton, Christopher/A-5971-2008
OI Fulton, Christopher/0000-0002-1140-1999; Shedrawi,
   George/0000-0002-4507-7293
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 2045-7758
PD FEB
PY 2018
VL 8
IS 3
BP 1918
EP 1928
DI 10.1002/ece3.3779
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000423807900043
PM 29435264
ER

PT J
AU Chen, BZ
   Smith, SL
AF Chen, Bingzhang
   Smith, Sherwood Lan
TI CITRATE 1.0: Phytoplankton continuous trait-distribution model with
   one-dimensional physical transport applied to the North Pacific
SO GEOSCIENTIFIC MODEL DEVELOPMENT
DT Article
ID THEMED SECTION ADVANCES; MICROBIAL SIZE SPECTRA; SUB-ARCTIC GYRE;
   CELL-SIZE; COMMUNITY STRUCTURE; GROWTH-RATE; MARINE-PHYTOPLANKTON;
   FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; SPECIES-DIVERSITY; GLOBAL OCEAN
AB Diversity plays critical roles in ecosystem functioning, but it remains challenging to model phytoplankton diversity in order to better understand those roles and reproduce consistently observed diversity patterns in the ocean. In contrast to the typical approach of resolving distinct species or functional groups, we present a ContInuous TRAiT-basEd phytoplankton model (CITRATE) that focuses on macroscopic system properties such as total biomass, mean trait values, and trait variance. This phytoplankton component is embedded within a nitrogen-phytoplankton-zooplanktondetritus- iron model that itself is coupled with a simplified one-dimensional ocean model. Size is used as the master trait for phytoplankton. CITRATE also incorporates "trait diffusion" for sustaining diversity and simple representations of physiological acclimation, i.e., flexible chlorophyllto- carbon and nitrogen-to-carbon ratios. We have implemented CITRATE at two contrasting stations in the North Pacific where several years of observational data are available. The model is driven by physical forcing including vertical eddy diffusivity imported from three-dimensional general ocean circulation models (GCMs). One common set of model parameters for the two stations is optimized using the Delayed-Rejection Adaptive Metropolis-Hasting Monte Carlo (DRAM) algorithm. The model faithfully reproduces most of the observed patterns and gives robust predictions on phytoplankton mean size and size diversity. CITRATE is suitable for applications in GCMs and constitutes a prototype upon which more sophisticated continuous trait-based models can be developed.
RI Smith, S./D-2493-2012
OI Smith, S./0000-0002-2338-5893; Chen, Bingzhang/0000-0002-1573-7473
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 1991-959X
EI 1991-9603
PD FEB 1
PY 2018
VL 11
IS 1
BP 467
EP 495
DI 10.5194/gmd-11-467-2018
SC Geology
UT WOS:000423877200003
ER

PT J
AU Antunes, C
   Pereira, AJ
   Fernandes, P
   Ramos, M
   Ascensao, L
   Correia, O
   Maguas, C
AF Antunes, Cristina
   Pereira, Ana Julia
   Fernandes, Patricia
   Ramos, Margarida
   Ascensao, Lia
   Correia, Otilia
   Maguas, Cristina
TI Understanding plant drought resistance in a Mediterranean coastal sand
   dune ecosystem: differences between native and exotic invasive species
SO JOURNAL OF PLANT ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE ecophysiology; water use strategy; leaf morphology; Acacia longifolia;
   Corema album; Helichrysum italicum
ID CARBON-ISOTOPE DISCRIMINATION; WATER-VAPOR ADSORPTION;
   ACACIA-LONGIFOLIA; USE EFFICIENCY; CHLOROPHYLL FLUORESCENCE; DIOXIDE
   CONCENTRATION; AUSTRALIAN ACACIAS; PHLOMIS-FRUTICOSA; COMMUNITY-SCALE;
   GAS-EXCHANGE
AB Aims
   Mediterranean coastal dunes are habitats of great conservation interest, with a distinctive and rich flora. In the last century, Acacia spp., native from Australia, have been introduced in Portugal, with the objective of stabilizing sand dunes, and since have become dominant in numerous sand dune habitats. This invasion process led to the reduction of native plant species richness, changed soil characteristics and modified habitat's microclimatic characteristics. The aim of this research was to typify and compare, in Mediterranean sand dune ecosystems, the ecophysiological responses to drought of toggle Helichrysum italicum and Corema album, two native species, and Acacia longifolia, an exotic invasive species. We addressed the following specific objectives: (i) to compare water relations and water use efficiencies, (ii) to evaluate water stress, (iii) to assess water use strategies and water sources used by plants and (iv) to evaluate the morphological adaptations at leaf and phyllode level.
   Methods
   In order to obtain an integrative view of ecophysiological patterns, water relations and performance measuring methods have been applied: predawn (psi(PD)) and midday (psi(MD)) water potential, chlorophyll <italic toggle a fluorescence, oxygen isotopic composition of xylem, rain and groundwater (delta O-18) and leaf carbon isotopic discrimination (Delta C-13). The leaf characteristics of the three species, as well as the histochemistry of non-glandular trichome cell walls, were also studied to identify morpho-traits related to drought resistance.
   Important Findings
   The results support our initial hypothesis: although A. longifolia clearly possesses a degree of resistance to water stress, such ability is provided by a different water strategy, when compared to native species. Natives relied on morphological adaptations to restrict water loss, whereas the invasive species adjusted the water uptake as a way to balance their limited ability of restricting water loss. We corroborate that woody native species (i) have a conservative water-saving strategy and minor seasonal variations relative to invasive species, (ii) use enriched water sources during drought periods, indicating different water sources and root systems comparing with invasive species and (iii) present drought leaf morpho-functional adaptations related with limiting water loss. Comparing the physiological performance of invasive and native species can offer causal explanations for the relative success of alien plant invasions on sand dunes ecosystems.
RI CESAM, UA/M-3762-2015
OI Antunes, Cristina/0000-0002-5934-388X
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 1752-9921
EI 1752-993X
PD FEB
PY 2018
VL 11
IS 1
BP 26
EP 38
DI 10.1093/jpe/rtx014
SC Plant Sciences; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000423200400004
ER

PT J
AU Hornick, KM
   Buschmann, AH
AF Hornick, Katherine M.
   Buschmann, Alejandro H.
TI Insights into the diversity and metabolic function of bacterial
   communities in sediments from Chilean salmon aquaculture sites
SO ANNALS OF MICROBIOLOGY
DT Article
DE Salmon aquaculture; Bacterial communities; Chile; Pyrosequencing;
   Organic loading; Functional diversity
ID FISH FARM SEDIMENTS; ORGANIC ENRICHMENT GRADIENT; SULFATE-REDUCING
   BACTERIA; DEEP-SEA SEDIMENTS; MICROBIAL COMMUNITIES; RESISTANCE GENES;
   SEASONAL-CHANGES; ATLANTIC SALMON; SOUTHERN CHILE; ANTIMICROBIAL
   RESISTANCE
AB Aquaculture is an extremely valuable and rapidly expanding sector worldwide, but concerns exist related to environmental sustainability. The sediment below aquaculture farms receives inputs of antimicrobials, metal-containing products, and organic matter from uneaten food and fecal material. These inputs impact the surrounding marine microbial communities in complex ways; however, functional diversity shifts related to taxonomic composition remain poorly understood. Here, we investigated the effect of pollution from marine fish farms on sediment bacterial communities. We compared the bacterial communities and functional bacterial diversity in surface sediments at salmon aquaculture and reference sites in Chilo,, southern Chile, using Roche 454 pyrosequencing of the 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) gene and the predictive metagenomics approach (Phylogenetic Investigation of Communities by Reconstruction of Unobserved States, PICRUSt). Bacterial diversity, measured as the inverse Simpson index, was significantly lower at aquaculture than at reference sites, while species richness, based on Chao's estimator, was not significantly different. Nevertheless, community composition differed significantly between reference and aquaculture sites. We found that Gammaproteobacteria and several taxa involved in remediating metal contamination and known to have antimicrobial resistances were enriched at aquaculture sites. However, PICRUSt predicted functions indicated a degree of functional redundancy between sites, whereas taxonomic-functional relationships indicated differences in the functional traits of specific taxa at aquaculture sites. This study provides a first step in understanding the bacterial community structure and functional changes due to Chilean salmon aquaculture and has direct implications for using bacterial shifts as indicators of aquaculture perturbations.
OI Buschmann, Alejandro/0000-0003-3246-681X; Hornick,
   Katherine/0000-0003-3933-4035
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 1590-4261
EI 1869-2044
PD FEB
PY 2018
VL 68
IS 2
BP 63
EP 77
DI 10.1007/s13213-017-1317-8
SC Biotechnology & Applied Microbiology; Microbiology
UT WOS:000423051200001
ER

PT J
AU Mims, MC
   Kirk, EEH
   Lytle, DA
   Olden, JD
AF Mims, Meryl C.
   Kirk, Emily E. Hartfield
   Lytle, David A.
   Olden, Julian D.
TI Traits-based approaches support the conservation relevance of landscape
   genetics
SO CONSERVATION GENETICS
DT Article
DE Landscape genetics; Conservation genetics; Traits-based approaches;
   Multispecies inference; Focal traits; Trait databases
ID LIFE-HISTORY TRAITS; CLIMATE-CHANGE; FUNCTIONAL TRAITS; POPULATION;
   CONNECTIVITY; DATABASE; DIFFERENTIATION; SALAMANDER; DISPERSAL; FLOW
AB Calls for evaluating general principles in landscape genetics reflect a broader recognition that multispecies inference is a promising strategy for supporting conservation actions across wide-ranging taxonomies and geographies. Formal evaluation of frameworks for multispecies inference is critical to identify opportunities for generalization and to avoid misguided extrapolation that results in ineffective conservation and management efforts. Traits-based approaches are now widely recognized as useful in addressing knowledge gaps where species-specific data may not be available or feasible to obtain. Here we present a case for the application of traits-based approaches in landscape genetics to improve conservation application. We discuss the fundamental theoretical framework and growing empirical evidence supporting the utility of traits-based approaches in landscape genetics, and we highlight an example of the implementation of traits to predict landscape genetic relationships for a range of aquatic taxa native to the southwestern United States. Finally, we discuss opportunities, challenges, and future directions of using traits to characterize landscape genetic relationships. Ultimately, traits-based approaches can help address growing calls for the development and testing of general principles in landscape genetics in order to improve application to conservation challenges.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1566-0621
EI 1572-9737
PD FEB
PY 2018
VL 19
IS 1
BP 17
EP 26
DI 10.1007/s10592-017-1028-5
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Genetics & Heredity
UT WOS:000422938300002
ER

PT J
AU Cavaille, P
   Dumont, B
   Van Looy, K
   Floury, M
   Tabacchi, E
   Evette, A
AF Cavaille, Paul
   Dumont, Bernard
   Van Looy, Kris
   Floury, Mathieu
   Tabacchi, Eric
   Evette, Andre
TI Influence of riverbank stabilization techniques on taxonomic and
   functional macrobenthic communities
SO HYDROBIOLOGIA
DT Article
DE Riverbank restoration; Bioengineering; Macroinvertebrates; Taxonomic
   richness; Biological traits
ID LARGE EUROPEAN RIVERS; MACROINVERTEBRATE COMMUNITIES; BIOENGINEERING
   TECHNIQUES; STREAMBANK STABILIZATION; BENTHIC INVERTEBRATES; SPATIAL
   HETEROGENEITY; RESTORATION MEASURES; EROSION CONTROL; SPECIES TRAITS;
   WATER-QUALITY
AB Riverbank erosion is linked to increasing risks in piedmont areas due to urbanization and hydromorphological alterations of rivers. Changes in riparian vegetation and in sediment dynamics modify aquatic macroinvertebrate communities. In this context, riverbank stabilization is a major issue in the conservation of stream ecosystem functioning. In this study, we aimed at assessing the impacts of riverbank stabilization techniques on the taxonomic and functional properties of benthic macroinvertebrate communities living in alpine mountain streams. For this purpose, the effects of four riverbank stabilization techniques (riprap, mixed, cribwall, and fascine) on the taxonomic richness and biological traits involved in the main ecological processes were tested and compared with natural bank conditions. Overall, the macroinvertebrate richness was lower in stabilized banks than in natural conditions, and communities welcomed on natural banks were significantly different from those found on managed banks. The biological trait composition such as "maximum potential size," "life cycle duration," "reproduction," "feeding habits," and "trophic status" differed significantly among riverbanks, especially between natural banks and the riprap, mixed, and cribwall trio. In a context of macroinvertebrate biodiversity and functional restoration, we can advocate the fascine technique as the most suitable technique tested.
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 0018-8158
EI 1573-5117
PD FEB
PY 2018
VL 807
IS 1
BP 19
EP 35
DI 10.1007/s10750-017-3380-3
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000417867600002
ER

PT J
AU Bonett, RM
   Phillips, JG
   Ledbetter, NM
   Martin, SD
   Lehman, L
AF Bonett, Ronald M.
   Phillips, John G.
   Ledbetter, Nicholus M.
   Martin, Samuel D.
   Lehman, Luke
TI Rapid phenotypic evolution following shifts in life cycle complexity
SO PROCEEDINGS OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY B-BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES
DT Article
DE amphibia; biphasic; constraints; metamorphosis; paedomorphosis; traits
ID PLETHODONTID SALAMANDERS; LOCOMOTOR PERFORMANCE; ADAPTIVE EVOLUTION;
   SQUAMATE REPTILES; THYROID-HORMONE; RE-EVOLUTION; BODY-FORM; GENE FLOW;
   HISTORY; SELECTION
AB Life cycle strategies have evolved extensively throughout the history of metazoans. The expression of disparate life stages within a single ontogeny can present conflicts to trait evolution, and therefore may have played a major role in shaping metazoan forms. However, few studies have examined the consequences of adding or subtracting life stages on patterns of trait evolution. By analysing trait evolution in a clade of closely related salamander lineages we show that shifts in the number of life cycle stages are associated with rapid phenotypic evolution. Specifically, salamanders with an aquaticonly (paedomorphic) life cycle have frequently added vertebrae to their trunk skeleton compared with closely related lineages with a complex aquatic-to-terrestrial (biphasic) life cycle. The rate of vertebral column evolution is also substantially lower in biphasic lineages, which may reflect the functional compromise of a complex cycle. This study demonstrates that the consequences of life cycle evolution can be detected at very fine scales of divergence. Rapid evolutionary responses can result from shifts in selective regimes following changes in life cycle complexity.
OI Bonett, Ronald/0000-0002-2708-3446
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0962-8452
EI 1471-2954
PD JAN 31
PY 2018
VL 285
IS 1871
AR 20172304
DI 10.1098/rspb.2017.2304
SC Life Sciences & Biomedicine - Other Topics; Environmental Sciences &
   Ecology; Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000423774700016
PM 29343600
ER

PT J
AU Kremer, CT
   Fey, SB
   Arellano, AA
   Vasseur, DA
AF Kremer, Colin T.
   Fey, Samuel B.
   Arellano, Aldo A.
   Vasseur, David A.
TI Gradual plasticity alters population dynamics in variable environments:
   thermal acclimation in the green alga Chlamydomonas reinhartdii
SO PROCEEDINGS OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY B-BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES
DT Article
DE phenotypic plasticity; environmental variation; thermal performance;
   temperature; beneficial acclimation hypothesis; ecological forecasting
ID PREDATOR-PREY SYSTEM; ECO-EVOLUTIONARY DYNAMICS; FRESH-WATER
   PHYTOPLANKTON; PHENOTYPIC PLASTICITY; RAPID EVOLUTION; FUNCTIONAL
   TRAITS; MARINE-PHYTOPLANKTON; ECOLOGICAL DYNAMICS; COMMUNITY ECOLOGY;
   HEAT-STRESS
AB Environmental variability is ubiquitous, but its effects on populations are not fully understood or predictable. Recent attention has focused on how rapid evolution can impact ecological dynamics via adaptive trait change. However, the impact of trait change arising from plastic responses has received less attention, and is often assumed to optimize performance and unfold on a separate, faster timescale than ecological dynamics. Challenging these assumptions, we propose that gradual plasticity is important for ecological dynamics, and present a study of the plastic responses of the freshwater green algae Chlamydomonas reinhardtii as it acclimates to temperature changes. First, we show that C. reinhardtii's gradual acclimation responses can both enhance and suppress its performance after a perturbation, depending on its prior thermal history. Second, we demonstrate that where conventional approaches fail to predict the population dynamics of C. reinhardtii exposed to temperature fluctuations, a new model of gradual acclimation succeeds. Finally, using high-resolution data, we show that phytoplankton in lake ecosystems can experience thermal variation sufficient to make acclimation relevant. These results challenge prevailing assumptions about plasticity's interactions with ecological dynamics. Amidst the current emphasis on rapid evolution, it is critical that we also develop predictive methods accounting for plasticity.
TC 6
Z9 6
SN 0962-8452
EI 1471-2954
PD JAN 10
PY 2018
VL 285
IS 1870
AR 20171942
DI 10.1098/rspb.2017.1942
SC Life Sciences & Biomedicine - Other Topics; Environmental Sciences &
   Ecology; Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000419973000007
PM 29321297
ER

PT J
AU Martins, CPP
   Fernandez-Alvarez, FA
   Villanueva, R
AF Martins, Catarina P. P.
   Fernandez-Alvarez, Fernando A.
   Villanueva, Roger
TI Invertebrate predation on egg masses of the European cuttlefish, Sepia
   officinalis: An experimental approach
SO ESTUARINE COASTAL AND SHELF SCIENCE
DT Article
DE Predation; Eggs; Cephalopod; Marine invertebrates; NE Atlantic;
   Multivariate correspondence analysis
ID CALLINECTES-SAPIDUS RATHBUN; PREY INTERACTIONS; BLUE-CRAB;
   FUNCTIONAL-MORPHOLOGY; GASTROPODA-MURICIDAE; MOLLUSCA-GASTROPODA;
   MEDITERRANEAN SEA; FEEDING-BEHAVIOR; CARCINUS-MAENAS; CRUSTACEA
AB The eggs of the European cuttlefish, Sepia officinalis, develop attached to the seafloor in shallow water habitats and possess a relatively thick black capsule that protects them from the surrounding environment. Since embryological development may take several months, eggs are vulnerable to a variety of threats present in shallow waters, including predation. This study investigates predation of S. officinalis eggs by benthic invertebrates. Twenty-eight invertebrate species from 6 different phyla and with diverse feeding habits were tested as potential predators under laboratory conditions. We also investigated how the feeding traits of these species are related to the mechanical ability to break the egg capsule and prey upon cuttlefish embryos. Species that fed on cuttlefish eggs were the sea snail Bolinus brandaris, the crab Cancer pagurus, the hermit crab Dardanus arrosor, the lobster Homarus gammarus, the invasive blue crab Callinectes sapidus, the shrimp Squilla mantis, the sea urchins Echinus melo, Cidaris sp. and Paracentrotus lividus and the starfish Astropecten aranciacus. It is of note that C. sapidus is a potential predatory crab. which raises the concern that this invasive species may constitute a novel threat for cuttlefish eggs as more populations become established in NE Atlantic waters. Of the biological traits examined, prey capture tools in the tested species best explained the experimental feeding results, suggesting that predation of S. officinalis eggs was determined generally by a mechanical factor and highlighting the importance of the protective egg capsule against predators. However, chemosensory factors are likely to be implicated as well. Thus, this work contributes to the understanding of the ecology of early life stages of cuttlefish and the factors that can affect offspring survival and subsequently impact the recruitment of this species. (C) 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
RI Villanueva, Roger/D-6911-2011
OI Villanueva, Roger/0000-0001-8122-3449
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 0272-7714
EI 1096-0015
PD JAN 5
PY 2018
VL 200
BP 437
EP 448
DI 10.1016/j.ecss.2017.11.016
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000424308600039
ER

PT J
AU Massaro, A
   Pajuelo, JG
AF Massaro, A.
   Pajuelo, J. G.
TI Life-history traits of seabream Boops boops (Linnaeus, 1758) in the
   central eastern Atlantic Ocean (Canary Islands)
SO AFRICAN JOURNAL OF MARINE SCIENCE
DT Article
DE age; gonad histology; growth; maturity; otoliths; reproductive cycle;
   sex ratio; spawning period
ID WEIGHT-LENGTH RELATIONSHIPS; REPRODUCTIVE-BIOLOGY; TELEOSTEI SPARIDAE;
   DIPLODUS-VULGARIS; AGE-DETERMINATION; GRAN-CANARIA; FISH; GROWTH; BOGUE;
   PISCES
AB Life-history traits of the sparid Boops boops are studied for the first time in an isolated Atlantic population. Boops boops is a hermaphrodite species characterised by late gonochorism or non-functional hermaphroditism. The 1:0.852 ratio of females to males was significantly different from unity. Both sexes had similar size distributions; however, females outnumbered males at sizes of between 16 and 18 cm TL, whereas males predominated among fish larger than 28 cm TL. The average lengths at first maturity for females and males were 16.02 (SD 0.28) and 16.49 (SD 0.25) cm TL, respectively, with no significant difference between sexes. Spawning-capable females were first observed in January, at a low percentage, and were present until May. The gonadosomatic index of both females and males peaked in February. Vitellogenesis did not begin synchronously, and the simultaneous presence of oocytes in all stages of development indicated an asynchronous mode of ovarian development. The presence of postovulatory follicles, together with tertiary-yolk-vesicle oocytes, indicates that the species is a multiple spawner. An age-length key showed an age-group composition for females of between 0 and 4 years, whereas males were between 0 and 5 years. The von Bertalanffy growth parameters for females were L-infinity = 32.3 cm TL, k = 0.44 y(-1) and t(0) = -0.81 y, and for males they were L-infinity = 35.3 cm TL, k= 0.38 y(-1) and t(0) = -0.80 y.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1814-232X
EI 1814-2338
PY 2018
VL 40
IS 4
BP 423
EP 437
DI 10.2989/1814232X.2018.1543133
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000454154300007
ER

PT J
AU Ortega-Cisneros, K
   Yokwana, S
   Sauer, W
   Cochrane, K
   Cockcroft, A
   James, NC
   Potts, WM
   Singh, L
   Smale, M
   Wood, A
   Pecl, G
AF Ortega-Cisneros, K.
   Yokwana, S.
   Sauer, W.
   Cochrane, K.
   Cockcroft, A.
   James, N. C.
   Potts, W. M.
   Singh, L.
   Smale, M.
   Wood, A.
   Pecl, G.
TI Assessment of the likely sensitivity to climate change for the key
   marine species in the southern Benguela system
SO AFRICAN JOURNAL OF MARINE SCIENCE
DT Article
DE data-poor assessment; eastern boundary upwelling system; ecological
   assessment; macroecology; marine fisheries; phenology; species traits;
   South Africa
ID STEENBRAS LITHOGNATHUS-LITHOGNATHUS; LOBSTER JASUS-LALANDII; RANGE
   SHIFTS; WESTERN CAPE; LIFE-HISTORY; AFRICA; FISHERIES; OCEAN; COAST;
   VULNERABILITY
AB Climate change is altering many environmental parameters of coastal waters and open oceans, leading to substantial present-day and projected changes in the distribution, abundance and phenology of marine species. Attempts to assess how each species might respond to climate change can be data-, resource- and time-intensive. Moreover, in many regions of the world, including South Africa, species may be of vital socioeconomic or ecological importance though critical gaps may exist in our basic biological or ecological knowledge of the species. Here, we adapt and apply a trait-based sensitivity assessment for the key marine species in the southern Benguela system to estimate their potential relative sensitivity to the impacts of climate change. For our analysis, 40 priority species were selected based on their socioeconomic, ecological and/or recreational importance in the system. An extensive literature review and consultation with experts was undertaken concerning each species to gather information on their life history, habitat use and potential stressors. Fourteen attributes were used to estimate the selected species' sensitivity and capacity to respond to climate change. A score ranging from low to high sensitivity was given for each attribute, based on the available information. Similarly, a score was assigned to the type and quality of information used to score each particular attribute, allowing an assessment of data-quality inputs for each species. The analysis identified the white steenbras Lithognathus lithognathus, soupfin shark Galeorhinus galeus, St Joseph Callorhinchus capensis and abalone Haliotis midae as potentially the most sensitive species to climate-change impacts in the southern Benguela system. There were data gaps for larval dispersal and settlement and metamorphosis cues for most of the evaluated species. Our results can be used by resource managers to determine the type of monitoring, intervention and planning that may be required to best respond to climate change, given the limited resources and significant knowledge gaps in many cases.
OI Ortega-Cisneros, Kelly/0000-0003-2511-5448; James,
   Nicola/0000-0002-9472-5314
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1814-232X
EI 1814-2338
PY 2018
VL 40
IS 3
BP 279
EP 292
DI 10.2989/1814232X.2018.1512526
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000445862100006
ER

PT J
AU Polonia, ARM
   Cleary, DFR
   Coelho, FJRD
   Becking, LE
   de Voogd, NJ
   Toha, AHA
   Gomes, NCM
AF Moura Polonia, Ana Rita
   Richard Cleary, Daniel Francis
   Riso da Costa Coelho, Francisco Jose
   Becking, Leontine E.
   de Voogd, Nicole Joy
   Toha, Abdul Hamid A.
   Marcial Gomes, Newton Carlos
TI Compositional analysis of archaeal communities in high and low microbial
   abundance sponges in the Misool coral reef system, Indonesia
SO MARINE BIOLOGY RESEARCH
DT Article
DE Mathias Middelboe; Archaea; 16S rRNA gene; Aaptos lobata; HMA; LMA;
   PICRUSt
ID MARINE SPONGES; BACTERIAL COMMUNITIES; CENARCHAEUM-SYMBIOSUM; DIVERSITY;
   SEDIMENT; INSIGHTS; SEAWATER; COMPLEX; ENVIRONMENT; THAUMARCHAEOTA
AB The high/low microbial abundance (HMA/LMA) dichotomy in sponges has been the subject of several studies over recent years, but few studies have analysed this dichotomy in terms of the sponge archaeal community and function. Using a 16S rRNA gene barcoded pyrosequencing approach and predictive functional analysis (PICRUSt) we compared the archaeal composition, richness and predicted function of one HMA sponge (Xestospongia testudinaria), one LMA sponge (Stylissa carteri) and one sponge species of unknown microbial abundance (Aaptos lobata). Although most of the archaeal sequences were assigned to the Crenarchaeota phylum, S. carteri had the highest percentage of sequences assigned to the Euryarchaeota phylum. Variation among sponge species explained >85% of the variation in archaeal operational taxonomic unit (OTU) composition with each sponge species forming a distinct cluster. There were significant differences in predicted PICRUSt profiles among sponge species, suggesting that archaeal communities present in the studied sponge species may perform different functions. X. testudinaria and A. lobata were similar both in terms of OTU and KEGG orthologues composition, which may indicate that A. lobata is a HMA sponge. Additionally, some of the most enriched functions seem to be related to traits associated with high and low microbial abundance sponges.
RI Gomes, Newton/K-3211-2015; Moura Polonia, Ana Rita/K-7911-2014; CESAM,
   UA/M-3762-2015
OI Gomes, Newton/0000-0003-1934-0091; Moura Polonia, Ana
   Rita/0000-0003-3381-7677; Cleary, Daniel/0000-0002-6143-3390; Coelho,
   Francisco/0000-0001-7638-8628
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1745-1000
EI 1745-1019
PY 2018
VL 14
IS 6
BP 537
EP 550
DI 10.1080/17451000.2018.1498977
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000443903500001
ER

PT J
AU Wang, QH
   Hao, RJ
   Zhao, XX
   Huang, RL
   Zheng, Z
   Deng, YW
   Chen, WY
   Du, XD
AF Wang, Qingheng
   Hao, Ruijuan
   Zhao, Xiaoxia
   Huang, Ronglian
   Zheng, Zhe
   Deng, Yuewen
   Chen, Weiyao
   Du, Xiaodong
TI Identification of EGFR in pearl oyster (Pinctada fucata martensii) and
   correlation analysis of its expression and growth traits
SO BIOSCIENCE BIOTECHNOLOGY AND BIOCHEMISTRY
DT Article
DE Pinctada fucata martensii; growth traits; epidermal growth factor
   receptor; correlation analysis
ID FACTOR RECEPTOR; ERBB RECEPTORS; FACTOR-ALPHA; HUMAN GENOME; SEQUENCE;
   BIOLOGY; PROTEIN; CANCER; GENES; ADAPTATION
AB Marine pearl production is directly influenced by the growth speed of Pinctada fucata martensii. However, the slow growth rate of this organism remains the main challenge in aquaculture production. Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), an important receptor of tyrosine kinases in animals, plays versatile functions in development, growth and tissue regeneration. In this study, we described the characteristic and function of an EGFR gene identified from P. f. martensii (PmEGFR). PmEGFR possesses a typical EGFR structure and is expressed in all studied tissues, with the highest expression level in adductor muscle. PmEGFR expression level is significantly higher in the fast-growing group than that in the slow-growing one. Correlation analysis represents that shell height and shell weight show positive correlation with PmEGFR expression (p<0.05), and total weight and tissue weight exhibit positive correlation with it (p<0.01). This study indicates that PmEGFR is a valuable functional gene associated with growth traits.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0916-8451
EI 1347-6947
PY 2018
VL 82
IS 7
BP 1073
EP 1080
DI 10.1080/09168451.2018.1459174
SC Biochemistry & Molecular Biology; Biotechnology & Applied Microbiology;
   Chemistry; Food Science & Technology
UT WOS:000436822900002
PM 29621937
ER

PT J
AU Campelo, RPD
   Diaz, XFG
   Santos, G
   Melo, PAMD
   Melo, M
   Figueiredo, LGP
   Silva, AP
   Bezerra, LEA
   Montes, MDF
   Neumann-Leitao, S
AF de Santana Campelo, Renata Polyana
   Garcia Diaz, Xiomara Franchesca
   Santos, Gleice
   de Castro Melo, Pedro Augusto Mendes
   Melo Junior, Mauro
   Pereira Figueiredo, Lucas Guedes
   Silva, Andrea Pinto
   Arruda Bezerra, Luis Ernesto
   Flores Montes, Manuel de Jesus
   Neumann-Leitao, Sigrid
TI Small-scale distribution of the mesozooplankton in a tropical insular
   system
SO BRAZILIAN JOURNAL OF OCEANOGRAPHY
DT Article
DE Community structure; Copepoda; Sazonality; Functional traits
ID ZOOPLANKTON COMMUNITIES; SOUTHWESTERN ATLANTIC; COPEPOD ASSEMBLAGES;
   CONTINENTAL-SHELF; LARVACEAN HOUSES; BRAZIL; ISLANDS; COASTAL; OCEAN;
   BIOGEOGRAPHY
AB In the present work, spatial and seasonal fluctuations of the abundance and diversity of mesozooplankton are presented, with special attention being given to copepod assemblages from coastal area of the Fernando de Noronha Archipelago (FNA) (3 degrees 50'24"S and 32 degrees 24'48"W). Sampling was carried out during the dry and rainy seasons of two consecutive years (July and December 2013) and (June and November 2014). A total of 37 mesozooplankton taxa were recorded, being the copepods the most diversified group (15 taxa). The Subclass Copepoda dominated in both periods sampled, comprising 53% and 86% of the total abundance in the dry and rainy season respectively. The species considered abundant were: Calanopia americana, Undinula vulgaris, Oithona plumifera and Corycaeus speciosus. The rainy season favored a significant increase in the abundance of mesozooplankton and copepods. However, a low value of the ShannonWiener diversity index was observed in this same seasonal period. This was explained by the dominance of the species C. americana and U. vulgaris in the studied area. Spatial differences have not been verified. The copepod assemblages was composed mostly by species considered as predator-carnivours of greater importance on the pelagic trophic web, indicators of oligotrophic conditions and components of a major portion of fish food items. Thus, we suggest that a spatially homogeneous mesozooplankton community characterizes the coastal area of Fernando de Noronha Archipelago with variations related mainly to the seasonal factor.
OI MELO, PEDRO/0000-0002-4117-239X
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 1679-8759
EI 1982-436X
PD JAN-MAR
PY 2018
VL 66
IS 1
BP 15
EP 29
DI 10.1590/S1679-87592018147306601
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000432972900002
ER

PT J
AU Chmara, R
   Szmeja, J
   Banas, K
AF Chmara, Rafal
   Szmeja, Jozef
   Banas, Krzysztof
TI The relationships between structural and functional diversity within and
   among macrophyte communities in lakes
SO JOURNAL OF LIMNOLOGY
DT Article
DE alpha- and beta-diversity; macrophyte communities; oligotrophic lakes;
   life history traits; diversity partitioning
ID SPECIES-DIVERSITY; AQUATIC MACROPHYTES; PLANT-COMMUNITIES;
   LOBELIA-DORTMANNA; SOFTWATER LAKES; WATER; BIODIVERSITY; RICHNESS;
   CLASSIFICATION; INDIVIDUALS
AB We studied the relationships between structural and functional diversity within and among macrophyte communities of softwater lakes. Diversity was assessed based on Simpson's diversity index (SD), species richness (S), Rao's functional diversity (FDQ) and shared plant traits along a gradient of pH. A total of 10,800 cover-plant samples (area=0.1 m(2)) were analysed, collected from 241 sections of the bottom (with a depth resolution of 1.0 m) of 38 lakes in Poland. We identified 59 species of macrophytes and recognized four communities. Along a gradient of increasing pH we found i) an increase of species richness; ii) a uniformity of abundance in communities; and iii) an increase in the quantitative contribution of life history traits such as perennials, submerged anchoring, leaf placement along an orthotropic shoot and generative reproduction. On the other hand, there was a decrease in unanchored and evergreen perennials. In our study, we found that the variety of these traits within communities is greater than that between them. Within lakes, structural diversity was low, whereas it was high between lakes. Functional diversity exhibited an opposite pattern; it was high at lake scale, and low between lakes. A combination of partitioning diversity and utilizing environmental variables significantly improves the prediction of community structure and the conservation of lakes.
OI BANAS, KRZYSZTOF/0000-0002-2131-8400
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1129-5767
EI 1723-8633
PY 2018
VL 77
IS 1
BP 100
EP 108
DI 10.4081/jlimnol.2017.1630
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000432877400008
ER

PT J
AU Aronne, G
   Arena, C
   De Micco, V
   Giovanetti, M
   Buonanno, M
AF Aronne, Giovanna
   Arena, Carmen
   De Micco, Veronica
   Giovanetti, Manuela
   Buonanno, Maurizio
TI Full light and soil drought constrain plant growth in Mediterranean
   cliffs: the case of Primula palinuri Petagna
SO PLANT BIOSYSTEMS
DT Article
DE Chasmophyte; Mediterranean cliff plants; narrow-endemic plants; Primula;
   relict plant species; species-based conservation biology
ID LEAF LIFE-SPAN; GEOGRAPHICAL-DISTRIBUTION; SEEDLING ESTABLISHMENT; WATER
   AVAILABILITY; SECT. AURICULA; RESPONSES; STRATEGY; TRAITS;
   PHOTOPROTECTION; FLUORESCENCE
AB In any biogeographical region, cliffs shelter a larger number of relict species than do the surrounding areas. To develop effective conservation strategies, experimental studies are needed. We focused on Mediterranean coastal cliffs and on Primula palinuri Petagna, an endangered narrow-endemic plant, included in the IUCN Red List and chosen as a key species. The hypothesis was that light intensity and soil water availability could affect survival and growth of juvenile plants. To avoid the bias of other cliff environmental factors and to overcome problems of cliff site inaccessibility, we performed an ex-situ experiment. The effect of two light regimes and two soil water availability conditions on survival and morpho-functional traits were analysed. Plants grown under reduced light intensity and wet soil showed no reduction in survival and performed very well in terms of growth and storage accumulation. By contrast, full light and dry soil proved to be detrimental conditions. Overall results suggested that cliff environmental conditions play an important role in conservation of narrow-endemic species. The decreasing trend of the already severely fragmented populations of P. palinuri and the ongoing increasing aridity is likely to contribute to a further reduction of the already narrow distribution this cliff relict species.
OI GIOVANETTI, MANUELA/0000-0001-9442-0062
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1126-3504
EI 1724-5575
PY 2018
VL 152
IS 4
BP 863
EP 872
DI 10.1080/11263504.2017.1359211
SC Plant Sciences
UT WOS:000432652900034
ER

PT J
AU de Almeida, FF
   Santos-Silva, EN
   Ector, L
   Wetzel, CE
AF de Almeida, Fabiane F.
   Santos-Silva, Edinaldo N.
   Ector, Luc
   Wetzel, Carlos E.
TI Eunotia amazonica sp nov (Bacillariophyta), a common stalk-forming
   species from the Rio Negro basin (Brazilian Amazon)
SO EUROPEAN JOURNAL OF PHYCOLOGY
DT Article
DE Amazon River; biomonitoring; diatoms; Eunotia; functional diversity;
   life-form; Neotropics; traits
ID DIATOM ECOLOGICAL GUILDS; ATLANTIC COASTAL-PLAIN; ALGAL COMMUNITIES;
   ORGANIC-MATTER; GENUS EUNOTIA; LIFE-FORMS; RIVERS; TAXONOMY; SYSTEMS;
   REGION
AB A new stalk-forming diatom was observed at high relative abundances on periphytic samples collected in the Rio Negro hydrographic basin (Brazilian Amazon) and is here described using light and scanning electron microscopy. We also present ecological preferences of the new species. Eunotia amazonica sp. nov. co-dominated periphytic samples collected during the rainy seasons of 2013 and 2014 near the city of Manaus (Amazonas, Brazil). The main diagnostic feature of the new species is the stalk-forming growth form (Cymbella-like') illustrated here for the first time in the genus Eunotia Ehrenberg. Previous reports on growth forms in common European databases for this genus included colonial (ribbon-like') but also mobile', fixed by pads' or without structures of fixation'. We demonstrated that the three dominant Eunotia species in periphytic samples from the Rio Negro all exhibited distinct growth forms' or habits: Eunotia amazonica sp. nov. (stalked), Eunotia intricans Metzeltin & Lange-Bertalot (ribbon-like) and Eunotia rabenhorstiana (Grunow) Hustedt (branched-arborescent). The high diversity of species, many of which are unknown to science, as well as the poorly known life-forms and habits of the Eunotiaceae in the region, partially prevent the use of metrics based on life-form to assess ecological changes. Generic assumptions based on robust statistical methods may obscure reality and lead to biased conclusions of diatom community changes in poorly explored regions such as Neotropical freshwater rivers, where the Eunotiaceae are largely dominant, particularly in the Amazon basin.
OI Ector, Luc/0000-0002-4573-9445
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0967-0262
EI 1469-4433
PY 2018
VL 53
IS 2
BP 166
EP 179
DI 10.1080/09670262.2017.1402372
SC Plant Sciences; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000431546100006
ER

PT J
AU Villnas, A
   Hewitt, J
   Snickars, M
   Westerbom, M
   Norkko, A
AF Villnas, Anna
   Hewitt, Judi
   Snickars, Martin
   Westerbom, Mats
   Norkko, Alf
TI Template for using biological trait groupings when exploring large-scale
   variation in seafloor multifunctionality
SO ECOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS
DT Article
DE Baltic Sea; benthic communities; ecosystem multifunctionality; groupings
   of biological traits; marine spatial planning; sediment ecosystem
   function; spatial distribution
ID MARINE BENTHIC ECOSYSTEMS; FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; BALTIC SEA; SPECIES
   TRAITS; BIODIVERSITY; BIOTURBATION; COMMUNITIES; SERVICES; ECOLOGY;
   DYNAMICS
AB Understanding large-scale spatial variation in ecosystem properties and associated functionality is key for successful conservation of ecosystems. This study provides a template for how to estimate differences in ecosystem functionality over large spatial scales by using groupings of biological traits. We focus on trait groupings that describe three important benthic ecosystem properties, namely bioturbation, community stability, and juvenile dispersal. Recognizing that groups of traits interact and are constrained within an organism, we statistically define important functional trait subgroups that describe each ecosystem property. The sub-groups are scored according to their weighted ecological impact to gain an overall estimation of the cumulative expression of each ecosystem property at individual sites. Furthermore, by assigning each property a value relative to its observed maximum, and by summing up the individual property values, we offer an estimate of benthic ecosystem multi-functionality. Based on a spatially extensive benthic data set, we were able to identify coastal areas with high and low potential for the considered benthic ecosystem properties and the measure of ecosystem multifunctionality. Importantly, we show that a large part of the spatial variation in functional trait sub-groups and in benthic ecosystem multifunctionality was explained by environmental change. Our results indicate that through this simplification it is possible to estimate the functionality of the seafloor. Such information is vital in marine spatial planning efforts striving to balance the utilization with the preservation of natural resources.
RI Norkko, Alf/A-1856-2012
OI Norkko, Alf/0000-0002-9741-4458
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 1051-0761
EI 1939-5582
PD JAN
PY 2018
VL 28
IS 1
BP 78
EP 94
DI 10.1002/eap.1630
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000429004700006
PM 28940452
ER

PT J
AU de Carvalho, RA
   Tejerina-Garro, FL
AF de Carvalho, Rodrigo Assis
   Tejerina-Garro, Francisco Leonardo
TI Headwater-river gradient: trait-based approaches show functional
   dissimilarities among tropical fish assemblages
SO MARINE AND FRESHWATER RESEARCH
DT Article
DE central Brazil; functional ecology; RLQ; river-continuum concept;
   Tocantins-Araguaia River basin; trait-environment relationships
ID COMMUNITY STRUCTURE; ENVIRONMENT RELATIONSHIPS; 4TH-CORNER PROBLEM;
   SPECIES TRAITS; STREAM FISHES; AQUATIC SYSTEMS; CENTRAL BRAZIL; PARENTAL
   CARE; BODY-SIZE; FOOD WEBS
AB Traditionally, species richness and composition of freshwater communities are expected to change according to the structural variation from headwaters to river mouth. In the present study, we hypothesised that fish functional traits will respond to this gradient, leading to functional dissimilarities between fish assemblages of headwaters and those of rivers. We addressed the following questions: (1) which functional traits are present in fish assemblages of each habitat type; (2) which environmental factors determine the occurrence of fish functional traits; and (3) how functional traits are related to each environmental variable? Our findings showed dissimilarities between fish assemblages of headwaters and those of rivers, mainly driven by channel depth, channel width, water temperature, water turbidity and concentration of dissolved oxygen, whereas altitude, water temperature and pH were mainly correlated with variation within each habitat type. These results suggested that not only do the physical variables proposed in classical theory of the river-continuum concept follow the upstream-downstream gradient in structuring the functional organisation of fish assemblages, but that also physicochemical variables, such as turbidity and concentration of dissolved oxygen, display this trend in tropical river systems. Moreover, our results have given a first perspective on what kind of fish species and fish functional traits to expect in each habitat type and, consequently, along the headwater-river mouth gradient.
OI Carvalho, Rodrigo/0000-0002-2398-1935
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1323-1650
EI 1448-6059
PY 2018
VL 69
IS 4
BP 574
EP 584
DI 10.1071/MF17149
SC Fisheries; Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000428402100008
ER

PT J
AU Foster, CN
   Barton, PS
   MacGregor, CI
   Catford, JA
   Blanchard, W
   Lindenmayer, DB
AF Foster, Claire N.
   Barton, Philip S.
   MacGregor, Christopher I.
   Catford, Jane A.
   Blanchard, Wade
   Lindenmayer, David B.
TI Effects of fire regime on plant species richness and composition differ
   among forest, woodland and heath vegetation
SO APPLIED VEGETATION SCIENCE
DT Article
DE community composition; competition; disturbance regime; dry sclerophyll
   vegetation; fire frequency; fire management; species richness; Sydney
   Coastal Forest; Sydney Coastal Heath
ID TIME-SINCE-FIRE; SYDNEY REGION; SANDSTONE COMMUNITIES; EASTERN
   AUSTRALIA; FUNCTIONAL TYPES; MAMMAL RESPONSES; WOODY-PLANTS; CROWN-FIRE;
   FREQUENCY; LANDSCAPE
AB QuestionDo the effects of fire regimes on plant species richness and composition differ among floristically similar vegetation types?
   LocationBooderee National Park, south-eastern Australia.
   MethodsWe completed floristic surveys of 87 sites in Sydney Coastal dry sclerophyll vegetation, where fire history records have been maintained for over 55years. We tested for associations between different aspects of the recent fire history and plant species richness and composition, and whether these relationships were consistent among structurally defined forest, woodland and heath vegetation types.
   ResultsThe relationship between fire regime variables and plant species richness and composition differed among vegetation types, despite the three vegetation types having similar species pools. Fire frequency was positively related to species richness in woodland, negatively related to species richness in heath, and unrelated to species richness in forest. These different relationships were explained by differences in the associations between fire history and species traits among vegetation types. The negative relationship between fire frequency and species richness in heath vegetation was underpinned by reduced occurrence of resprouting species at high fire frequency sites (more than four fires in 55years). However, in forest and woodland vegetation, resprouting species were not negatively associated with fire frequency.
   ConclusionsWe hypothesize that differing relationships among vegetation types were underpinned by differences in fire behaviour, and/or biotic and abiotic conditions, leading to differences in plant species mortality and post-fire recovery among vegetation types. Our findings suggest that even when there is a high proportion of shared species between vegetation types, fires can have very different effects on vegetation communities, depending on the structural vegetation type. Both research and management of fire regimes may therefore benefit from considering vegetation types as separate management units.
RI Catford, Jane/B-9578-2012
OI Catford, Jane/0000-0003-0582-5960
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1402-2001
EI 1654-109X
PD JAN
PY 2018
VL 21
IS 1
BP 132
EP 143
DI 10.1111/avsc.12345
SC Plant Sciences; Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Forestry
UT WOS:000425120600015
ER

PT J
AU de Castro, DMP
   Doledec, S
   Callisto, M
AF Parreira de Castro, Diego M.
   Doledec, Sylvain
   Callisto, Marcos
TI Land cover disturbance homogenizes aquatic insect functional structure
   in neotropical savanna streams
SO ECOLOGICAL INDICATORS
DT Article
DE Functional diversity; Multiple traits; Aquatic invertebrates; Biotic
   homogenization
ID FRESH-WATER ECOSYSTEMS; SPECIES TRAITS; BIOTIC HOMOGENIZATION;
   MACROINVERTEBRATE COMMUNITIES; BIOLOGICAL TRAITS; HEADWATER STREAMS;
   INVERTEBRATE COMMUNITIES; ANTHROPOGENIC STRESS; MULTIPLE STRESSORS;
   BRAZILIAN CERRADO
AB By modifying local habitat conditions, the alteration of land cover can result in severe faunal impairment, subsequently affecting ecosystem functioning. We analyzed changes in the composition of Ephemeroptera, Plecoptera and Trichoptera (EPT) assemblages along a gradient of human disturbance intensity in 66 neotropical savanna headwater stream sites. Whereas EPT genus richness did not differ among the levels of disturbance, functional richness and diversity significantly decreased from least-to highly disturbed sites. Using a combination of RLQ and fourth-corner analyses, we found that 12 of 28 trait categories were significantly associated with changes in catchment land use and cover intensity, local physical habitat, and water quality. EPT assemblages in least-disturbed sites were characterized by higher proportions of large body size and low body flexibility with < 1 reproductive cycle per year, case building, and climbing functional traits. In addition, disturbed sites demonstrated high assemblage functional homogenization compared with least disturbed sites. To our knowledge, this study is the first that examines the response of invertebrate functional structure along a gradient of human disturbance at a large spatial scale in the Neotropics. In doing so, we demonstrate the applicability of multiple trait-based approaches and the higher reliability of functional structure in comparison to taxonomic composition for assessing the effects of human disturbances in neotropical streams.
TC 4
Z9 6
SN 1470-160X
EI 1872-7034
PD JAN
PY 2018
VL 84
BP 573
EP 582
DI 10.1016/j.ecolind.2017.09.030
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000425828200059
ER

PT J
AU Tuya, F
   Herrero-Barrencua, A
   Bosch, NE
   Abreu, AD
   Haroun, R
AF Tuya, F.
   Herrero-Barrencua, A.
   Bosch, N. E.
   Abreu, A. D.
   Haroun, R.
TI Reef fish at a remote tropical island (Principe Island, Gulf of Guinea):
   disentangling taxonomic, functional and phylogenetic diversity patterns
   with depth
SO MARINE AND FRESHWATER RESEARCH
DT Article
DE Atlantic Ocean; biodiversity; fourth-corner problem; tropical reefs;
   west equatorial Africa
ID CORAL-REEF; CANARIAN ARCHIPELAGO; MARINE ASSEMBLAGES; SPECIES RICHNESS;
   COMMUNITIES; BIODIVERSITY; ABUNDANCE; GRADIENT; TRAITS; SCALES
AB The ecology of reef fish varies with depth, although patterns in diversity remain largely undescribed, in particular the complementarity of their taxonomic, functional and phylogenetic facets. In the present study we investigated patterns of taxonomic, functional and phylogenetic diversity of fish on 21 reefs, at depths ranging from 3 to 31 m, at Principle Island (Gulf of Guinea). Taxonomic and functional diversity decreased monotonically with depth; the pattern was less accentuated for phylogenetic diversity. Functional diversity was saturated at high levels of taxonomic diversity, reflecting redundancy in species traits, particularly at the shallower reefs. Functional diversity increased linearly with phylogenetic diversity; thus, increasing niche availability seems to translate into a larger diversity of phylogenies. Dissimilarities in the structure and composition of fish assemblages among reefs were correlated with differences in depth, including a progressive turnover in species. Depth affected the functional traits of nearshore reef fish. Trophic breadth decreased with depth; carnivores and planktivores increased with depth, whereas herbivores decreased with depth. Smallsized fusiform fish dominated on the shallowest reefs. In summary, the present study demonstrated decays in biodiversity, from different perspectives, of reef fish with depth, which are connected with shifts in fish traits.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1323-1650
EI 1448-6059
PY 2018
VL 69
IS 3
BP 395
EP 402
DI 10.1071/MF17233
SC Fisheries; Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000426049200006
ER

PT J
AU Montero-Serra, I
   Garrabou, J
   Doak, DF
   Figuerola, L
   Hereu, B
   Ledoux, JB
   Linares, C
AF Montero-Serra, Ignasi
   Garrabou, Joaquim
   Doak, Daniel F.
   Figuerola, Laura
   Hereu, Bernat
   Ledoux, Jean-Baptiste
   Linares, Cristina
TI Accounting for Life-History Strategies and Timescales in Marine
   Restoration
SO CONSERVATION LETTERS
DT Article
DE Comparative demography; coral reefs; Corallium rubrum; integral
   projection models; life-history tradeoffs; octocorals; restoration;
   Mediterranean sea; transplants
ID MEDITERRANEAN RED CORAL; PRECIOUS CORALS; REEF CORALS; CONSERVATION;
   TRANSPLANTATION; MANAGEMENT; TRAITS; BIODIVERSITY; RECRUITMENT;
   POPULATIONS
AB Understanding the drivers of restoration success is a central issue for marine conservation. Here, we explore the role of life-history strategies of sessile marine species in shaping restoration outcomes and their associated timescales. A transplantation experiment for the extremely slow-growing and threatened octocoral Corallium rubrum was highly successful over a relatively short term due to high survival and reproductive potential of the transplanted colonies. However, demographic projections predict that from 30 to 40 years may be required for fully functional C. rubrum populations to develop. More broadly, a comprehensive meta-analysis revealed a negative correlation between survival after transplanting and growth rates among sessile species. As a result, simulated dynamics for a range of marine sessile invertebrates predict that longer recovery times are positively associated with survival rates. These results demonstrate a tradeoff between initial transplantation efforts and the speed of recovery. Transplantation of slow-growing species will tend to require lower initial effort due to higher survival after transplanting, but the period required to fully recover habitat complexity will tend to be far longer. This study highlights the important role of life history as a driver of marine restoration outcomes and shows how demographic knowledge and modeling tools can help managers to anticipate the dynamics and timescales of restored populations.
OI Montero-Serra, Ignasi/0000-0003-0284-0591; Linares,
   Cristina/0000-0003-3855-2743
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 1755-263X
PD JAN-FEB
PY 2018
VL 11
IS 1
DI 10.1111/conl.12341
SC Biodiversity & Conservation
UT WOS:000424825900003
ER

PT J
AU Valente-Neto, F
   Duraes, L
   Siqueira, T
   Roque, FO
AF Valente-Neto, Francisco
   Duraes, Lucas
   Siqueira, Tadeu
   Roque, Fabio O.
TI Metacommunity detectives: Confronting models based on niche and
   stochastic assembly scenarios with empirical data from a tropical stream
   network
SO FRESHWATER BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE assembly rules; dendritic networks; Neotropical streams; simulation
   model
ID ATLANTIC FOREST; FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; COMMUNITY ECOLOGY; LANDSCAPE
   FILTERS; SPECIES-DIVERSITY; PATTERNS; TRAITS; CONNECTIVITY;
   BIODIVERSITY; MECHANISMS
AB 1. Metacommunity models predict that species richness and composition patterns in communities are determined predominantly by environmental selection and dispersal, with speciation and drift playing a lesser role. In the tropics, our understanding about these processes comes almost purely from empirical data; there is lack of formal confrontation between models and data.
   2. Here, we evaluated if a metacommunity simulation model designed for riverine networks could predict insect diversity patterns observed in a tropical stream network within the Atlantic Forest biome. Our individual-oriented model simulated biological processes, including dispersal of adults, oviposition, dispersal of larvae, colonisation and mortality. We used this model to simulate communities considering three assembly scenarios (niche, niche-stochastic and stochastic) and three flight dispersal ability groups (low, medium and high). To parameterise the model, we used data from 97 riffle communities, distributed along a stream network, and biological data from the literature.
   3. For the high dispersal ability group, none of the assembly scenarios significantly predicted the observed richness and community dissimilarity. The niche-stochastic assembly scenario, however, provided a better approximation of observed richness and community dissimilarity for the medium and low dispersal ability groups.
   4. Our results show that deterministic and stochastic processes combine to better explain observed aquatic insect diversity patterns. Although simulations were limited to similar explanatory power to studies using pattern-oriented approaches, our findings highlight the promise of a more predictive use of metacommunity simulation models.
RI Valente-Neto, Francisco/M-3991-2014; Siqueira, Tadeu/A-6978-2009
OI Valente-Neto, Francisco/0000-0002-5298-3753; Siqueira,
   Tadeu/0000-0001-5069-2904
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 0046-5070
EI 1365-2427
PD JAN
PY 2018
VL 63
IS 1
SI SI
BP 86
EP 99
DI 10.1111/fwb.13050
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000423280700008
ER

PT J
AU Silva, JLA
   Souza, AF
   Caliman, A
   Voigt, EL
   Lichston, JE
AF Silva, Jose L. A.
   Souza, Alexandre F.
   Caliman, Adriano
   Voigt, Eduardo L.
   Lichston, Juliana E.
TI Weak whole-plant trait coordination in a seasonally dry South American
   stressful environment
SO ECOLOGY AND EVOLUTION
DT Article
DE Brazil; CSR triangle; leaf biochemistry; leaf-shedding behavior;
   litterfall production; plant anatomy
ID ECONOMICS SPECTRUM; LEAF ECONOMICS; HYDRAULIC TRAITS; STEM TRAITS;
   RAIN-FOREST; TREE; COMBINATIONS; ANGIOSPERMS; STRATEGIES; CALIFORNIA
AB A core question involving both plant physiology and community ecology is whether traits from different organs are coordinated across species, beyond pairwise trait correlations. The strength of within-community trait coordination has been hypothesized to increase along gradients of environmental harshness, due to the cost of adopting ecological strategies out of the viable niche space supported by the abiotic conditions. We evaluated the strength of trait relationship and coordination in a stressful environment using 21 leaf and stem traits of 21 deciduous and evergreen woody species from a heath vegetation growing on coastal sandy plain in northeastern South America. The study region faces marked dry season, high soil salinity and acidity, and poor nutritional conditions. Results from multiple factor analyses supported two weak and independent axes of trait coordination, which accounted for 25%-29% of the trait variance using phylogenetically independent contrasts. Trait correlations on the multiple factor analyses main axis fit well with the global plant economic spectrum, with species investing in small leaves and dense stems as opposed to species with softer stems and large leaves. The species' positions on the main functional axis corresponded to the competitor-stress-tolerant side of Grime's CSR triangle of plant strategies. The weak degree of trait coordination displayed by the heath vegetation species contradicted our expectation of high trait coordination in stressful environmental habitats. The distinct biogeographic origins of the species occurring in the study region and the prevalence of a regional environmental filter coupled with local homogeneous conditions could account for prevalence of trait independence we observed.
RI Souza, Alexandre/G-3016-2011; Caliman, Adriano/A-8668-2008
OI Souza, Alexandre/0000-0001-7468-3631; Caliman,
   Adriano/0000-0001-9218-5601; Silva, Jose/0000-0003-0314-7625
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 2045-7758
PD JAN
PY 2018
VL 8
IS 1
BP 4
EP 12
DI 10.1002/ece3.3547
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000419483200001
PM 29321846
ER

PT J
AU Cuesta, JA
   Delius, GW
   Law, R
AF Cuesta, Jose A.
   Delius, Gustav W.
   Law, Richard
TI Sheldon spectrum and the plankton paradox: two sides of the same coin-a
   trait-based plankton size-spectrum model
SO JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE Plankton; Coexistence; Allometry; Size-spectrum; Scale-invariance; Cell
   division
ID FOOD WEBS; PELAGIC ECOSYSTEM; DIVERSITY PATTERNS; BOTTOM-UP; BODY-SIZE;
   TOP-DOWN; COMMUNITIES; POPULATIONS; STABILITY; GROWTH
AB The Sheldon spectrum describes a remarkable regularity in aquatic ecosystems: the biomass density as a function of logarithmic body mass is approximately constant over many orders of magnitude. While size-spectrum models have explained this phenomenon for assemblages of multicellular organisms, this paper introduces a species-resolved size-spectrum model to explain the phenomenon in unicellular plankton. A Sheldon spectrum spanning the cell-size range of unicellular plankton necessarily consists of a large number of coexisting species covering a wide range of characteristic sizes. The coexistence of many phytoplankton species feeding on a small number of resources is known as the Paradox of the Plankton. Our model resolves the paradox by showing that coexistence is facilitated by the allometric scaling of four physiological rates. Two of the allometries have empirical support, the remaining two emerge from predator-prey interactions exactly when the abundances follow a Sheldon spectrum. Our plankton model is a scale-invariant trait-based size-spectrum model: it describes the abundance of phyto- and zooplankton cells as a function of both size and species trait (the maximal size before cell division). It incorporates growth due to resource consumption and predation on smaller cells, death due to predation, and a flexible cell division process. We give analytic solutions at steady state for both the within-species size distributions and the relative abundances across species.
RI Cuesta, Jose/A-7157-2008
OI Cuesta, Jose/0000-0001-9890-9367; Delius, Gustav/0000-0003-4092-8228
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0303-6812
EI 1432-1416
PD JAN
PY 2018
VL 76
IS 1-2
BP 67
EP 96
DI 10.1007/s00285-017-1132-7
SC Life Sciences & Biomedicine - Other Topics; Mathematical & Computational
   Biology
UT WOS:000419452400003
PM 28547211
ER

PT J
AU Gianuca, AT
   Engelen, J
   Brans, KI
   Hanashiro, FTT
   Vanhamel, M
   van den Berg, EM
   Souffreau, C
   De Meester, L
AF Gianuca, Andros T.
   Engelen, Jessie
   Brans, Kristien I.
   Hanashiro, Fabio Toshiro T.
   Vanhamel, Matthias
   van den Berg, Edwin M.
   Souffreau, Caroline
   De Meester, Luc
TI Taxonomic, functional and phylogenetic metacommunity ecology of
   cladoceran zooplankton along urbanization gradients
SO ECOGRAPHY
DT Article
ID URBAN HEAT-ISLAND; BODY-SIZE; COMMUNITY STRUCTURE; SPECIES RICHNESS;
   LANDSCAPE; DIVERSITY; BIODIVERSITY; PREDATION; DYNAMICS; PATTERNS
AB As human population size increases and cities become denser, several urban-related selection pressures increasingly affect species composition in both terrestrial and aquatic habitats. Yet, it is not well known whether and how urbanization influences other facets of biodiversity, such as the functional and evolutionary composition of communities, and at what spatial scale urbanization acts. Here we used a hierarchical sampling design in which urbanization levels were quantified at seven spatial scales (ranging from 50 to 3200 m radii). We found that urbanization gradients are associated with a strong shift in cladoceran zooplankton species traits, which in turn affected phylogenetic composition of the entire metacommunity, but only when considering urbanization at the smallest spatial scale (50 m radius). Specifically, small cladoceran species dominated in more urbanized ponds whereas large-bodied, strong competitors prevailed in less urbanized systems. We also show that trait and phylogenetic metrics strongly increase the amount of variation in beta-diversity that can be explained by degree of urbanization, environmental and spatial factors. This suggests that the mechanisms shaping beta-diversity in our study system are mediated by traits and phylogenetic relatedness rather than species identities. Our study indicates that accounting for traits and phylogeny in metacommunity analyses helps to explain seemingly idiosyncratic patterns of variation in zooplankton species composition along urbanization gradients. The fact that urbanization acts only at the smallest spatial scale suggests that correctly managing environmental conditions locally has the power to counteract the effects of urbanization on biodiversity patterns. The multidimensional approach we applied here can be applied to other systems and organism groups and seems to be key in understanding how overall biodiversity changes in response to anthropogenic pressures and how this scales up to affect ecosystem functioning.
OI Gianuca, Andros/0000-0001-9639-3846; Souffreau,
   Caroline/0000-0003-0997-9190
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 0906-7590
EI 1600-0587
PD JAN
PY 2018
VL 41
IS 1
BP 183
EP 194
DI 10.1111/ecog.02926
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000419052200017
ER

PT J
AU Floury, M
   Souchon, Y
   Van Looy, K
AF Floury, Mathieu
   Souchon, Yves
   Van Looy, Kris
TI Climatic and trophic processes drive long-term changes in functional
   diversity of freshwater invertebrate communities
SO ECOGRAPHY
DT Article
ID SPECIES-RICHNESS; MACROINVERTEBRATE COMMUNITIES; STREAM
   MACROINVERTEBRATES; SPATIAL INSURANCE; NEIGHBOR MATRICES; AQUATIC
   INSECTS; BIODIVERSITY; ECOLOGY; SCALE; PRODUCTIVITY
AB When investigating the fields of biogeography and macroecology, climate- and productivity-related variables are frequently identified as the strongest correlates of species-diversity patterns. These variables have been usually merged under the climate/productivity hypothesis and describe the direct and indirect actions of climate on species. Being among the most vulnerable ecosystems to climate change, streams and rivers are expected to be influenced both by climatic and trophic (i.e. productivity-related) factors. We propose here to distinguish the relative influence of the two processes on large-scale, long-term changes in the functional diversity of freshwater invertebrate communities over two decades in France. To this end, we designed two functional indices using invertebrate traits to surrogate the respective mechanisms: climate vulnerability and feeding specialisation. Using geographically weighted regression (GWR) models, we showed that trends in both indices, along with the initial regional species-pools, have significantly contributed to the overall long-term increase in functional diversity of invertebrate communities. In addition, we highlighted a strong geographical differentiation in the contribution patterns with the climate vulnerability effect decreasing with latitude and the feeding specialisation effect being higher in headwaters than in large rivers. Finally, taking into account this non-stationarity in the ecological processes and responses using GWR models allowed explaining about 75% of the long-term changes in the community diversity. Consequently, this study offers sound perspectives in predicting the future patterns of trends in functional diversity of communities under different scenarios of environmental changes, like climate and/or land-use.
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0906-7590
EI 1600-0587
PD JAN
PY 2018
VL 41
IS 1
BP 209
EP 218
DI 10.1111/ecog.02701
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000419052200019
ER

PT J
AU Leitao, RP
   Zuanon, J
   Mouillot, D
   Leal, CG
   Hughes, RM
   Kaufmann, PR
   Villeger, S
   Pompeu, PS
   Kasper, D
   de Paula, FR
   Ferraz, SFB
   Gardner, TA
AF Leitao, Rafael P.
   Zuanon, Jansen
   Mouillot, David
   Leal, Cecilia G.
   Hughes, Robert M.
   Kaufmann, Philip R.
   Villeger, Sebastien
   Pompeu, Paulo S.
   Kasper, Daniele
   de Paula, Felipe R.
   Ferraz, Silvio F. B.
   Gardner, Toby A.
TI Disentangling the pathways of land use impacts on the functional
   structure of fish assemblages in Amazon streams
SO ECOGRAPHY
DT Article
ID FRESH-WATER FISH; MULTIPLE SPATIAL SCALES; COMMUNITY STRUCTURE; AQUATIC
   VERTEBRATES; ECOSYSTEM PROCESSES; DIVERSITY; HABITAT; DEFORESTATION;
   BIODIVERSITY; RESPONSES
AB Agricultural land use is a primary driver of environmental impacts on streams. However, the causal processes that shape these impacts operate through multiple pathways and at several spatial scales. This complexity undermines the development of more effective management approaches, and illustrates the need for more in-depth studies to assess the mechanisms that determine changes in stream biodiversity. Here we present results of the most comprehensive multi-scale assessment of the biological condition of streams in the Amazon to date, examining functional responses of fish assemblages to land use. We sampled fish assemblages from two large human-modified regions, and characterized stream conditions by physical habitat attributes and key landscape-change variables, including density of road crossings (i.e. riverscape fragmentation), deforestation, and agricultural intensification. Fish species were functionally characterized using ecomorphological traits describing feeding, locomotion, and habitat preferences, and these traits were used to derive indices that quantitatively describe the functional structure of the assemblages. Using structural equation modeling, we disentangled multiple drivers operating at different spatial scales, identifying causal pathways that significantly affect stream condition and the structure of the fish assemblages. Deforestation at catchment and riparian network scales altered the channel morphology and the stream bottom structure, changing the functional identity of assemblages. Local deforestation reduced the functional evenness of assemblages (i.e. increased dominance of specific trait combinations) mediated by expansion of aquatic vegetation cover. Riverscape fragmentation reduced functional richness, evenness and divergence, suggesting a trend toward functional homogenization and a reduced range of ecological niches within assemblages following the loss of regional connectivity. These results underscore the often-unrecognized importance of different land use changes, each of which can have marked effects on stream biodiversity. We draw on the relationships observed herein to suggest priorities for the improved management of stream systems in the multiple-use landscapes that predominate in human-modified tropical forests.
RI Villeger, Sebastien/C-6272-2011; Kasper, Daniele/K-7141-2013; Ferraz,
   Silvio/C-8851-2012; Pompeu, Paulo/F-6696-2012
OI Villeger, Sebastien/0000-0002-2362-7178; Ferraz,
   Silvio/0000-0003-1808-5420; Pompeu, Paulo/0000-0002-7938-1517
TC 9
Z9 9
SN 0906-7590
EI 1600-0587
PD JAN
PY 2018
VL 41
IS 1
BP 219
EP 232
DI 10.1111/ecog.02845
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000419052200020
PM 29910537
ER

PT J
AU Green, PT
   Harms, KE
AF Green, Peter T.
   Harms, Kyle E.
TI The causes of disproportionate non-random mortality among life-cycle
   stages
SO ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE community assembly; demographics; neutrality; niche; non-random
   mortality; traits; turnover
ID TROPICAL RAIN-FOREST; NEGATIVE DENSITY-DEPENDENCE;
   UNIFIED-NEUTRAL-THEORY; FUNCTIONAL TRAITS; SEEDLING MORTALITY; COMMUNITY
   ECOLOGY; SPECIES ABUNDANCE; REGENERATION NICHE; NORTH QUEENSLAND; PLANT
   DIVERSITY
AB The emergent properties of the collection of species in a natural community, such as diversity and the distribution of relative abundances, are influenced by both niche-based and neutral (stochastic) processes. This pluralistic view of the natural world reconciles theory with empirical observations better than does either a strictly niche- or neutrality-based perspective. Even so, rules (or rules of thumb) that govern the relative contributions that niche-based and stochastic processes make as communities assemble remain only vaguely formulated and incompletely tested. For example, the translation of non-random (non-neutral) ecological processes, which differentially sort among species within a community, into species-compositional patterns may occur more influentially within some demographic subsets of organisms than within others. In other words, the relative contributions of niche vs. neutral processes may vary among age-, size-, or stage-classes. For example, non-random patterns of mortality that occur among seedlings in a rain forest, or among newly settled juveniles in communities of sessile marine communities, could be more influential than non-random mortality during later stages in determining overall community diversity. We propose two alternative, mutually compatible, hypotheses to account for different levels of influence from mortality among life-cycle stages toward producing non-random patterns in organismal communities. The Turnover Model simply posits that those demographic classes characterized by faster rates of turnover contribute greater influence in the short-term as sufficient mortality gives rise to non-random changes to the community, as well as over the longer-term as multiple individuals of a given fast-turnover demographic class transition into later classes compared to each individual that ratchets from a slow-turnover starting class into a later class. The Turnover Model should apply to most communities of organisms. The Niche Model, which posits that niche-based processes are more influential in some demographic classes relative to others, may alternatively or additionally apply to communities. We also propose several alternative mechanisms, especially relevant to forest trees, that could cause dynamics consistent with the Niche Model. These mechanisms depend on differences among demographic classes in the extent of demographic variation that individual organisms experience through their trait values or neighborhood conditions.
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0012-9658
EI 1939-9170
PD JAN
PY 2018
VL 99
IS 1
BP 36
EP 46
DI 10.1002/ecy.2039
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000419240900005
PM 28977684
ER

PT J
AU Soininen, J
   Heino, J
   Wang, JJ
AF Soininen, Janne
   Heino, Jani
   Wang, Jianjun
TI A meta-analysis of nestedness and turnover components of beta diversity
   across organisms and ecosystems
SO GLOBAL ECOLOGY AND BIOGEOGRAPHY
DT Article
DE biodiversity; body size; dispersal; global; macroecology; meta-analysis;
   nestedness; turnover
ID PRESENCE-ABSENCE DATA; FRESH-WATER FISH; ENVIRONMENTAL HETEROGENEITY;
   METACOMMUNITY STRUCTURE; FUNCTIONAL BIODIVERSITY; GEOGRAPHICAL PATTERNS;
   LATITUDINAL GRADIENTS; AQUATIC COMMUNITIES; SPECIES-DIVERSITY; BIRD
   COMMUNITIES
AB Aim: The number of studies investigating the nestedness and turnover components of beta diversity has increased substantially, but our general understanding of the drivers of turnover and nestedness remains elusive. Here, we examined the effects of species traits, spatial extent, latitude and ecosystem type on the nestedness and turnover components of beta diversity.
   Location: Global. Time period: 1968-2017.
   Major taxa studied: From bacteria to mammals.
   Methods: From the 99 studies that partition total beta diversity into its turnover and nestedness components, we assembled 269 and 259 data points for the pairwise and multiple site beta-diversity metrics, respectively. Our data covered a broad variation in species dispersal type, body size and trophic position. The data were from freshwater, marine and terrestrial realms, and encompassed geographical areas from the tropics to near polar regions. We used linear modelling as a meta-regression tool to analyse the data.
   Results: Pairwise turnover, multiple site turnover and total beta diversity all decreased significantly with latitude. In contrast, multiple site nestedness showed a positive relationship with latitude. Beta-diversity components did not generally differ among the realms. The turnover component and total beta diversity increased with spatial extent, whereas nestedness was scale invariant for pairwise metrics. Multiple site beta-diversity components did not vary with spatial extent. Surprisingly, passively dispersed organisms had lower turnover and total beta diversity than flying organisms. Body size showed a relatively weak relationship with beta diversity but had important interactions with trophic position, thus also affecting beta diversity via interactive effects. Producers had significantly higher average pairwise turnover and total beta diversity than carnivores.
   Main conclusions: The present results provide evidence that species turnover, being consistently the larger component of total beta diversity, and nestedness are related to the latitude of the study area and intrinsic organismal features. We showed that two beta-diversity components had generally opposing patterns with regard to latitude. We highlight that beta-diversity partition may give additional insights into the underlying causes of spatial variability in biotic communities compared with total beta diversity alone.
OI Wang, Jianjun/0000-0001-7039-7136; Soininen, Janne/0000-0002-8583-3137
TC 11
Z9 12
SN 1466-822X
EI 1466-8238
PD JAN
PY 2018
VL 27
IS 1
BP 96
EP 109
DI 10.1111/geb.12660
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Physical Geography
UT WOS:000418125800010
ER

PT J
AU Espinola, F
   Dionisi, HM
   Borglin, S
   Brislawn, CJ
   Jansson, JK
   Mac Cormack, WP
   Carroll, J
   Sjoling, S
   Lozada, M
AF Espinola, Fernando
   Dionisi, Hebe M.
   Borglin, Sharon
   Brislawn, Colin J.
   Jansson, Janet K.
   Mac Cormack, Walter P.
   Carroll, JoLynn
   Sjoling, Sara
   Lozada, Mariana
TI Metagenomic Analysis of Subtidal Sediments from Polar and Subpolar
   Coastal Environments Highlights the Relevance of Anaerobic Hydrocarbon
   Degradation Processes
SO MICROBIAL ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE Cold environments; Subtidal sediments; Hydrocarbons; Anaerobic
   biodegradation; Community structure; Metagenomics; Biomarker genes
ID SULFATE-REDUCING BACTERIA; PRESTIGE OIL-SPILL; ALKANE HYDROXYLASE GENES;
   MICROBIAL COMMUNITY; MARINE-SEDIMENTS; AROMATIC-HYDROCARBONS; BALTIC
   SEA; DIVERSITY; OXIDATION; WATER
AB In this work, we analyzed the community structure and metabolic potential of sediment microbial communities in high-latitude coastal environments subjected to low to moderate levels of chronic pollution. Subtidal sediments from four low-energy inlets located in polar and subpolar regions from both Hemispheres were analyzed using large-scale 16S rRNA gene and metagenomic sequencing. Communities showed high diversity (Shannon's index 6.8 to 10.2), with distinct phylogenetic structures (< 40% shared taxa at the Phylum level among regions) but similar metabolic potential in terms of sequences assigned to KOs. Environmental factors (mainly salinity, temperature, and in less extent organic pollution) were drivers of both phylogenetic and functional traits. Bacterial taxa correlating with hydrocarbon pollution included families of anaerobic or facultative anaerobic lifestyle, such as Desulfuromonadaceae, Geobacteraceae, and Rhodocyclaceae. In accordance, biomarker genes for anaerobic hydrocarbon degradation (bamA, ebdA, bcrA, and bssA) were prevalent, only outnumbered by alkB, and their sequences were taxonomically binned to the same bacterial groups. BssA-assigned metagenomic sequences showed an extremely wide diversity distributed all along the phylogeny known for this gene, including bssA sensu stricto, nmsA, assA, and other clusters from poorly or not yet described variants. This work increases our understanding of microbial community patterns in cold coastal sediments, and highlights the relevance of anaerobic hydrocarbon degradation processes in subtidal environments.
RI Jansson, Janet/H-5478-2018
OI Jansson, Janet/0000-0002-5487-4315; Dionisi, Hebe/0000-0002-8075-2311;
   LOZADA, MARIANA/0000-0003-4037-9169
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0095-3628
EI 1432-184X
PD JAN
PY 2018
VL 75
IS 1
BP 123
EP 139
DI 10.1007/s00248-017-1028-5
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology;
   Microbiology
UT WOS:000418740100012
PM 28702706
ER

PT J
AU Rolo, V
   Olivier, PI
   Pfeifer, M
   van Aarde, RJ
AF Rolo, Victor
   Olivier, Pieter I.
   Pfeifer, Marion
   van Aarde, Rudolph J.
TI Functional diversity mediates contrasting direct and indirect effects of
   fragmentation on below- and above-ground carbon stocks of coastal dune
   forests
SO FOREST ECOLOGY AND MANAGEMENT
DT Article
DE Biodiversity homogenization; Carbon sequestration; Fragmented
   landscapes; Functional traits; Piecewise structural equation models
ID SPECIES RICHNESS; TROPICAL FORESTS; AMAZONIAN FOREST; COMMUNITY
   COMPOSITION; ECONOMICS SPECTRUM; BIOMASS DYNAMICS; PLANT TRAITS;
   SOUTH-AFRICA; TREES; SEQUESTRATION
AB Changes in structure and functioning of tree communities in response to forest fragmentation may alter tropical forest's capacity to store carbon and regulate climate. However, evidence for indirect effects of forest fragmentation on above - and belowground carbon pools through changes in forest biodiversity is scarce. Here we focus on understanding the relative importance of taxonomic and functional diversity and tree cover to explain above- and below-ground carbon stocks in coastal dune forest fragments. We surveyed tree species composition and structure in six coastal forest patches varying in size from 215 to 13350 ha, in Kwa-Zulu Natal, South Africa. For each fragment, we estimated carbon stocks of two pools, aboveground biomass (AGC) and soil organic carbon (SOC). We used structural equation models to test if and to what extent the effects of forest fragmentation on AGC and SOC were mediated by tree cover and taxonomic and functional diversity. Our results showed that forest fragmentation directly reduced AGC, but increased SOC. In contrast, forest fragmentation indirectly, through decreasing functional diversity, increased AGC, but decreased SOC. Small patches therefore had few tree species that were functional similar and had high AGC, but low SOC, which led to a negative relationship between species richness and AGC. Tree cover was not affected by fragmentation, and had a direct positive effect on AGC but not on SOC. Our results suggest that forest fragmentation simultaneously affect multiple processes which directly and indirectly affects carbon stocks of different pools. Fragmentation may trigger a process of biotic homogenization, in which a few species are positively related with carbon storage above-, but not below ground.
RI Rolo, Victor/H-1713-2016
OI Rolo, Victor/0000-0001-5854-9512; Pfeifer, Marion/0000-0002-6775-3141
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 0378-1127
EI 1872-7042
PD JAN 1
PY 2018
VL 407
BP 174
EP 183
DI 10.1016/j.foreco.2017.10.059
SC Forestry
UT WOS:000418214300020
ER

PT J
AU Chen, Y
   Yang, Y
   Zhu, HJ
   Romeis, J
   Li, YH
   Peng, YF
   Chen, XP
AF Chen, Yi
   Yang, Yan
   Zhu, Haojun
   Romeis, Jorg
   Li, Yunhe
   Peng, Yufa
   Chen, Xiuping
TI Safety of Bacillus thuringiensis Cry1C protein for Daphnia magna based
   on different functional traits
SO ECOTOXICOLOGY AND ENVIRONMENTAL SAFETY
DT Article
DE Bt protein; Water flea; Environmental risk assessment; Aquatic
   organisms; Non-target effects
ID GENETICALLY-MODIFIED RICE; BT-TRANSGENIC RICE; INSECTICIDAL PROTEIN;
   LEPIDOPTERA CRAMBIDAE; AQUATIC ECOSYSTEMS; STREAM ECOSYSTEMS;
   BY-PRODUCTS; MAIZE; CROPS; RESPONSES
AB Cry1C is a Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt) insecticidal protein and it can be produced by transgenic rice lines developed in China. Cladocera species are common aquatic arthropods that may be exposed to insecticidal proteins produced in Bt-transgenic plants through ingestion of pollen or crop residues in water. As the cladoceran Daphnia magna plays an important role in the aquatic food chain, it is important to assess the possible effects of Bt crops to this species. To evaluate the safety of the Cry1C protein for D. magna, individuals were exposed to different concentrations of purified Cry1C protein in M4 medium for 21 days. Potassium dichromate (K(2)Cr(2)Ow(7)), a known toxicant to D. magna, was added to M4 medium as a positive control treatment, and pure M4 medium was used as a negative control. Our results show that developmental, reproductive, and biochemical parameters of D. magna were not significantly different between Cry1C and negative control treatments but were significantly inhibited by the positive control. We thus conclude that D. magna is insensitive to Cry1C.
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 0147-6513
EI 1090-2414
PD JAN
PY 2018
VL 147
BP 631
EP 636
DI 10.1016/j.ecoenv.2017.08.065
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Toxicology
UT WOS:000416199700078
PM 28926817
ER

PT J
AU Tapolczai, K
   Bouchez, A
   Stenger-Kovacs, C
   Padisak, J
   Rimet, F
AF Tapolczai, Kalman
   Bouchez, Agnes
   Stenger-Kovacs, Csilla
   Padisak, Judit
   Rimet, Frederic
TI Taxonomy- or trait-based ecological assessment for tropical rivers? Case
   study on benthic diatoms in Mayotte island (France, Indian Ocean)
SO SCIENCE OF THE TOTAL ENVIRONMENT
DT Article
DE Bacillariophyta; Biomonitoring; Morphological traits; Quality index;
   Water Framework Directive
ID PHYTOPLANKTON ASSEMBLAGES; TORNA-STREAM; LAKES; INDEXES; COMMUNITIES;
   GUILDS; EUTROPHICATION; CLASSIFICATION; IDENTIFICATION; DISTURBANCES
AB Diatom-based ecological quality assessment methods have been implemented and used regularly in the Water Framework Directive. These indices use the species' abundance profiles along a specific environmental gradient, which they aim to assess. However, this approach has several problematic issues including the unstable and fast-changing diatom taxonomy. The use of traits can be a solution if their responses to the environmental pressure are well-defined. Here, we developed taxonomy-based and trait-based diatom assemblage indices to assess the ecological status of riverine sites on a tropical island. The two indices are based on two sub-indices that measure the diatom assemblage response to a nutrient and organic matter/turbidity gradient. Both taxonomy-and trait-based indices correlated significantly with the selected environmental gradients of the test database, which was not used during index development. We showed that traits could be used for quality assessment of the Mayotte rivers and require much less effort than taxonomy-based indices. There were differences between the two types of indices, which are discussed in this paper. As a perspective for further studies, tests of trait-based indices among different eco-regions would be challenging. (C) 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
RI RIMET, Frederic/S-2702-2018
OI RIMET, Frederic/0000-0002-5514-869X
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 0048-9697
EI 1879-1026
PD DEC 31
PY 2017
VL 607
BP 1293
EP 1303
DI 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.07.093
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000408755300129
PM 28738506
ER

PT J
AU Dencker, TS
   Pecuchet, L
   Beukhof, E
   Richardson, K
   Payne, MR
   Lindegren, M
AF Dencker, Tim Spaanheden
   Pecuchet, Laurene
   Beukhof, Esther
   Richardson, Katherine
   Payne, Mark R.
   Lindegren, Martin
TI Temporal and spatial differences between taxonomic and trait
   biodiversity in a large marine ecosystem: Causes and consequences
SO PLOS ONE
DT Article
ID SEA FISH COMMUNITY; FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; NORTH-SEA; SPECIES RICHNESS;
   CLIMATE-CHANGE; LATITUDINAL GRADIENTS; CORAL-REEFS; REDUNDANCY;
   PATTERNS; INDICATOR
AB Biodiversity is a multifaceted concept, yet most biodiversity studies have taken a taxonomic approach, implying that all species are equally important. However, species do not contribute equally to ecosystem processes and differ markedly in their responses to changing environments. This recognition has led to the exploration of other components of biodiversity, notably the diversity of ecologically important traits. Recent studies taking into account both taxonomic and trait diversity have revealed that the two biodiversity components may exhibit pronounced temporal and spatial differences. These apparent incongruences indicate that the two components may respond differently to environmental drivers and that changes in one component might not affect the other. Such incongruences may provide insight into the structuring of communities through community assembly processes, and the resilience of ecosystems to change. Here we examine temporal and spatial patterns and drivers of multiple marine biodiversity indicators using the North Sea fish community as a case study. Based on long-term spatially resolved survey data on fish species occurrences and bio-masses from 1983 to 2014 and an extensive trait dataset we: (i) investigate temporal and spatial incongruences between taxonomy and trait-based indicators of both richness and evenness; (ii) examine the underlying environmental drivers and, (iii) interpret the results in the context of assembly rules acting on community composition. Our study shows that taxonomy and trait-based biodiversity indicators differ in time and space and that these differences are correlated to natural and anthropogenic drivers, notably temperature, depth and substrate richness. Our findings show that trait-based biodiversity indicators add information regarding community composition and ecosystem structure compared to and in conjunction with taxonomy-based indicators. These results emphasize the importance of examining and monitoring multiple indicators of biodiversity in ecological studies as well as for conservation and ecosystem-based management purposes.
RI Richardson, Katherine/D-7592-2014; publicationpage, cmec/B-4405-2017;
   Payne, Mark/C-6844-2008
OI Richardson, Katherine/0000-0003-3785-2787; Payne,
   Mark/0000-0001-5795-2481; Dencker, Tim Spaanheden/0000-0001-7804-0828;
   Lindegren, Martin/0000-0002-9185-951X
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 1932-6203
PD DEC 18
PY 2017
VL 12
IS 12
AR e0189731
DI 10.1371/journal.pone.0189731
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000418389500055
PM 29253876
ER

PT J
AU Sathyendranath, S
   Brewin, RJW
   Jackson, T
   Melin, F
   Platt, T
AF Sathyendranath, S.
   Brewin, Robert J. W.
   Jackson, Thomas
   Melin, Frederic
   Platt, Trevor
TI Ocean-colour products for climate-change studies: What are their ideal
   characteristics?
SO REMOTE SENSING OF ENVIRONMENT
DT Article
ID PHYTOPLANKTON FUNCTIONAL TYPES; INHERENT OPTICAL-PROPERTIES; ATMOSPHERIC
   CORRECTION; CASE-1 WATERS; BIOOPTICAL PROPERTIES; GLOBAL DISTRIBUTION;
   3-COMPONENT MODEL; COASTAL WATERS; NORTH-ATLANTIC; PACIFIC-OCEAN
AB Ocean-colour radiometry is recognised as an Essential Climate Variable (ECV) according to the Global Climate Observing System (GCOS), because of its capability to observe significant properties of the marine ecosystem at synoptic to global scales. Yet the value of ocean colour for climate-change studies depends to a large extent not only on the decidedly important quality of the data per se, but. also on the qualities of the algorithms used to convert the multi-spectral radiance values detected by the ocean-colour satellite into relevant ecological, bio-optical and biogeochemical variables or properties of the ocean. The algorithms selected from the pool of available algorithms have to be fit for purpose: detection of marine ecosystem responses to climate change. Marine ecosystems might respond in a variety of ways to changing climate, including perturbations to regional distributions in the quantity and in the type of phytoplankton present, their locations and in their seasonal dynamics. The ideal algorithms would be capable of distinguishing between abundance and type, and would not mistake one for the other. They would be robust to changes in climate, and would not rely on assumptions that might be valid only under current climatic conditions. Based on such considerations, we identify a series of ideal qualitative traits that algorithms for climate-change studies would possess. Necessarily, such traits would have to complement the quantitative requirements for precision, accuracy and stability in the data over long time scales. We examine the extent to which available algorithms meet the criteria, according to the work carried out in the Ocean Colour Climate Change Initiative, and where improvements are still needed. (C) 2017 Published by Elsevier Inc.
OI Brewin, Robert/0000-0001-5134-8291
TC 12
Z9 12
SN 0034-4257
EI 1879-0704
PD DEC 15
PY 2017
VL 203
BP 125
EP 138
DI 10.1016/j.rse.2017.04.017
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Remote Sensing; Imaging Science &
   Photographic Technology
UT WOS:000418464200010
ER

PT J
AU Timm-Davis, LL
   Davis, RW
   Marshall, CD
AF Timm-Davis, Lori L.
   Davis, Randall W.
   Marshall, Christopher D.
TI Durophagous biting in sea otters (Enhydra lutris) differs kinematically
   from raptorial biting of other marine mammals
SO JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE Feeding kinematics; Durophagy; Morphometrics; Craniodental morphology
ID PARTICLE IMAGE VELOCIMETRY; BITE FORCE; FEEDING-BEHAVIOR; PREY CAPTURE;
   GINGLYMOSTOMA-CIRRATUM; FUNCTIONAL-ANALYSIS; CENTRARCHID FISHES; SUCTION
   GENERATION; FORAGING BEHAVIOR; MOTOR PATTERNS
AB Sea otters represent an interesting model for studies of mammalian feeding evolution. Although they are marine mammals, sea otters returned to the sea relatively recently and feed at the surface. Therefore, they represent a transitional stage of aquatic adaptation. Currently no feeding performance studies of sea otters have been conducted. The main objective of this study was to characterize the feeding kinematic profile in sea otters. It was hypothesized that sea otters would exhibit a terrestrial feeding behavior and that they forcefully crush hard prey at large gapes. As a result, biting kinematics would be congruent with biting behavior reported for their terrestrial ancestors, thus providing additional evidence that raptorial biting is a conserved behavior even in recently aquatic mammals. Sea otters consistently used a durophagous raptorial biting mode characterized by large gapes, large gape angles and lack of lateral gape occlusion. The shorter skulls and mandibles of sea otters, along with increased mechanical advantages of the masseter and increased bite force, form a repertoire of functional traits for durophagy. Here we consider durophagy to be a specialized raptorial biting feeding mode. A comparison of feeding kinematics of wild versus captive sea otters showed no significant differences in lateral kinematic profiles, and only minor differences in three frontal kinematic profiles, which included a slower maximum opening gape velocity, a slower maximum gape opening velocity, and a slower maximum closing gape velocity in captive sea otters. Data indicate functional innovations for producing large bite forces at wide gape and gape angles.
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 0022-0949
EI 1477-9145
PD DEC 15
PY 2017
VL 220
IS 24
BP 4703
EP 4710
DI 10.1242/jeb.162966
SC Life Sciences & Biomedicine - Other Topics
UT WOS:000417822800020
PM 29074703
ER

PT J
AU Crognale, S
   Zecchin, S
   Amalfitano, S
   Fazi, S
   Casentini, B
   Corsini, A
   Cavalca, L
   Rossetti, S
AF Crognale, Simona
   Zecchin, Sarah
   Amalfitano, Stefano
   Fazi, Stefano
   Casentini, Barbara
   Corsini, Anna
   Cavalca, Lucia
   Rossetti, Simona
TI Phylogenetic Structure and Metabolic Properties of Microbial Communities
   in Arsenic-Rich Waters of Geothermal Origin
SO FRONTIERS IN MICROBIOLOGY
DT Article
DE microbiome; thermal waters; detoxification processes; arsenic-related
   genes; arsenite; arsenate
ID YELLOWSTONE-NATIONAL-PARK; NUCLEIC-ACID CONTENT; FLOW-CYTOMETRY;
   BACTERIAL-POPULATIONS; OXIDIZING BACTERIA; SULFATE REDUCTION; FECAL
   MICROBIOTA; RAPID OXIDATION; VULCANO ISLAND; OXIDASE GENES
AB Arsenic (As) is a toxic element released in aquatic environments by geogenic processes or anthropic activities. To counteract its toxicity, several microorganisms have developed mechanisms to tolerate and utilize it for respiratory metabolism. However, still little is known about identity and physiological properties of microorganisms exposed to natural high levels of As and the role they play in As transformation and mobilization processes. This work aims to explore the phylogenetic composition and functional properties of aquatic microbial communities in As-rich freshwater environments of geothermal origin and to elucidate the key microbial functional groups that directly or indirectly may influence As transformations across a natural range of geogenic arsenic contamination. Distinct bacterial communities in terms of composition and metabolisms were found. Members of Proteobacteria, affiliated to Alpha- and Betaproteobacteria were mainly retrieved in groundwaters and surface waters, whereas Gammaproteobacteria were the main component in thermal waters. Most of the OTUs from thermal waters were only distantly related to 16S rRNA gene sequences of known taxa, indicating the occurrence of bacterial biodiversity so far unexplored. Nitrate and sulfate reduction and heterotrophic As(III)-oxidization were found as main metabolic traits of the microbial cultivable fraction in such environments. No growth of autotrophic As(III)-oxidizers, autotrophic and heterotrophic As(V)-reducers, Fe-reducers and oxidizers, Mn-reducers and sulfide oxidizers was observed. The ars genes, involved in As(V) detoxifying reduction, were found in all samples whereas aioA [As(III) oxidase] and arrA genes [As(V) respiratory reductase] were not found. Overall, we found that As detoxification processes prevailed over As metabolic processes, concomitantly with the intriguing occurrence of novel thermophiles able to tolerate high levels of As.
RI Amalfitano, Stefano/C-6737-2012
OI Amalfitano, Stefano/0000-0002-6148-1472; Cavalca,
   Lucia/0000-0002-3512-1705
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 1664-302X
PD DEC 12
PY 2017
VL 8
AR 2468
DI 10.3389/fmicb.2017.02468
SC Microbiology
UT WOS:000417699700001
PM 29312179
ER

PT J
AU Howes, TR
   Summers, BR
   Kingsley, DM
AF Howes, Timothy R.
   Summers, Brian R.
   Kingsley, David M.
TI Dorsal spine evolution in threespine sticklebacks via a splicing change
   in MSX2A
SO BMC BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE Stickleback; MSX2; msxa; Gasterosteidae; Fin spines; Acanthopterygii;
   Enhancers; Quantitative trait loci; Alternative splicing; Evolutionary
   genetics
ID GASTEROSTEUS-ACULEATUS L; CIS-REGULATORY CHANGES; GENETIC ARCHITECTURE;
   SKELETAL DEVELOPMENT; PARALLEL EVOLUTION; ADAPTIVE EVOLUTION;
   BRITISH-COLUMBIA; PELVIC REDUCTION; SPECIES-PAIR; ZEBRAFISH
AB Background: Dorsal spine reduction in threespine sticklebacks (Gasterosteus aculeatus) is a classic example of recurrent skeletal evolution in nature. Sticklebacks in marine environments typically have long spines that form part of their skeletal armor. Many derived freshwater populations have evolved shorter spines. Changes in spine length are controlled in part by a quantitative trait locus (QTL) previously mapped to chromosome 4, but the causative gene and mutations underlying the repeated evolution of this interesting skeletal trait have not been identified.
   Results: Refined mapping of the spine length QTL shows that it lies near the MSX2A transcription factor gene. MSX2A is expressed in developing spines. In F1 marine x freshwater fish, the marine allele is preferentially expressed. Differences in expression can be attributed to splicing regulation. Due to the use of an alternative 5' splice site within the first exon, the freshwater allele produces greater amounts of a shortened, non-functional transcript and makes less of the full-length transcript. Sequence changes in the MSX2A region are shared by many freshwater fish, suggesting that repeated evolution occurs by reuse of a spine-reduction variant.
   To demonstrate the effect of full-length MSX2A on spine length, we produced transgenic freshwater fish expressing a copy of marine MSX2A. The spines of the transgenic fish were significantly longer on average than those of their non-transgenic siblings, partially reversing the reduced spine lengths that have evolved in freshwater populations.
   Conclusions: MSX2A is a major gene underlying dorsal spine reduction in freshwater sticklebacks. The gene is linked to a separate gene controlling bony plate loss, helping explain the concerted effects of chromosome 4 on multiple armor-reduction traits. The nature of the molecular changes provides an interesting example of morphological evolution occurring not through a simple amino acid change, nor through a change only in gene expression levels, but through a change in the ratio of splice products encoding both normal and truncated proteins.
OI Howes, Timothy/0000-0002-0370-0200
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 1741-7007
PD DEC 7
PY 2017
VL 15
AR 115
DI 10.1186/s12915-017-0456-5
SC Life Sciences & Biomedicine - Other Topics
UT WOS:000417616900001
PM 29212540
ER

PT J
AU Wemheuer, B
   Wemheuer, F
   Meier, D
   Billerbeck, S
   Giebel, HA
   Simon, M
   Scherber, C
   Daniel, R
AF Wemheuer, Bernd
   Wemheuer, Franziska
   Meier, Dimitri
   Billerbeck, Sara
   Giebel, Helge-Ansgar
   Simon, Meinhard
   Scherber, Christoph
   Daniel, Rolf
TI Linking Compositional and Functional Predictions to Decipher the
   Biogeochemical Significance in DFAA Turnover of Abundant
   Bacterioplankton Lineages in the North Sea
SO MICROORGANISMS
DT Article
DE microbial diversity; microbial ecology; structural modelling; functional
   predictions; marine microbiology
ID DISSOLVED ORGANIC-MATTER; 16S RIBOSOMAL-RNA; FREE AMINO-ACIDS; MARINE
   BACTERIOPLANKTON; BACTERIAL COMMUNITIES; PHYTOPLANKTON BLOOM;
   ATLANTIC-OCEAN; WADDEN SEA; DIVERSITY; DYNAMICS
AB Deciphering the ecological traits of abundant marine bacteria is a major challenge in marine microbial ecology. In the current study, we linked compositional and functional predictions to elucidate such traits for abundant bacterioplankton lineages in the North Sea. For this purpose, we investigated entire and active bacterioplankton composition along a transect ranging from the German Bight to the northern North Sea by pyrotag sequencing of bacterial 16S rRNA genes and transcripts. Functional profiles were inferred from 16S rRNA data using Tax4Fun. Bacterioplankton communities were dominated by well-known marine lineages including clusters/genera that are affiliated with the Roseobacter group and the Flavobacteria. Variations in community composition and function were significantly explained by measured environmental and microbial properties. Turnover of dissolved free amino acids (DFAA) showed the strongest correlation to community composition and function. We applied multinomial models, which enabled us to identify bacterial lineages involved in DFAA turnover. For instance, the genus Planktomarina was more abundant at higher DFAA turnover rates, suggesting its vital role in amino acid degradation. Functional predictions further indicated that Planktomarina is involved in leucine and isoleucine degradation. Overall, our results provide novel insights into the biogeochemical significance of abundant bacterioplankton lineages in the North Sea.
OI Scherber, Christoph/0000-0001-7924-8911; Wemheuer,
   Bernd/0000-0002-1712-7871; Giebel, Helge-Ansgar/0000-0002-9452-0810;
   Daniel, Rolf/0000-0002-8646-7925
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 2076-2607
PD DEC
PY 2017
VL 5
IS 4
AR UNSP 68
DI 10.3390/microorganisms5040068
SC Microbiology
UT WOS:000443145300005
ER

PT J
AU Styga, JM
   Houslay, TM
   Wilson, AJ
   Earley, RL
AF Styga, Joseph M.
   Houslay, Thomas M.
   Wilson, Alastair J.
   Earley, Ryan L.
TI Ontogeny of the morphology-performance axis in an amphibious fish
   (Kryptolebias marmoratus)
SO JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL ZOOLOGY PART A-ECOLOGICAL AND INTEGRATIVE
   PHYSIOLOGY
DT Article
DE development; Kryptolebias; morphology; performance; terrestrial
   locomotion
ID MANGROVE RIVULUS; TERRESTRIAL LOCOMOTION; SWIMMING PERFORMANCE;
   HERMAPHRODITIC FISH; FEEDING PERFORMANCE; TRINIDADIAN GUPPY; BITE
   PERFORMANCE; COPING STYLE; EVOLUTION; LIZARDS
AB Establishing links between morphology and performance is important for understanding the functional, ecological, and evolutionary implications of morphological diversity. Relationships between morphology and performance are expected to be age dependent if, at different points during ontogeny, animals must perform in different capacities to achieve high fitness returns. Few studies have examined how the relationship between form and function changes across ontogeny. Here, we assess this relationship in the amphibious mangrove rivulus (Kryptolebias marmoratus) fish, a species that is both capable of and reliant on tail-flip jumping for terrestrial locomotion. Tail-flip jumping entails an individual transferring its weight to the caudal region of the body, launching itself from the substrate to navigate to new aquatic or semi-aquatic habitats. By combining repeated trials of jumping performance in 237 individuals from distinct age classes with a clearing and staining procedure to visualize bones in the caudal region, we test the hypotheses that as age increases (i) average jumping performance (body lengths jumped) will increase, (ii) the amount of variation for each trait will change, and (iii) the patterns of covariation/correlation among traits, which tell us about the integration of form with function, will also change. We find a significant increase in size-adjusted jumping performance with age, and modification to the correlation structure among traits across ontogeny. However, we also find that significant links between form and function evident in young animals disappear at later ontogenetic stages. Our study suggests that different functional mechanisms may be associated with high performance at different stages of development.
OI Wilson, Alastair/0000-0002-5045-2051; Houslay,
   Thomas/0000-0001-5592-9034
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 2471-5646
PD DEC
PY 2017
VL 327
IS 10
BP 620
EP 634
DI 10.1002/jez.2150
SC Zoology
UT WOS:000430083500005
PM 29537626
ER

PT J
AU Gilpin, JA
   Chadwick, NE
AF Gilpin, Jessica A.
   Chadwick, Nanette E.
TI Life-History Traits and Population Structure of Pederson Cleaner Shrimps
   Ancylomenes pedersoni
SO BIOLOGICAL BULLETIN
DT Article
ID CRAB CRYPTOCHIRUS-CORALLIODYTES; MARINE ORNAMENTAL FISH; CORAL-REEFS;
   DECAPODA CARIDEA; SEA-ANEMONES; THOR-AMBOINENSIS; MALE MORPHOTYPES;
   SEXUAL-MATURITY; RELATIVE GROWTH; HOST SELECTION
AB Cleaner organisms perform key functional roles in reducing rates of parasitism in marine communities. Pederson cleaner shrimps Ancylomenes pedersoni are major cleaners of reef fishes in the tropical western Atlantic and form obligate symbioses with host sea anemones. Information about their life-history traits would contribute to understanding how symbiosis impacts life-history evolution in crustaceans, but little is known about patterns of growth and reproduction in this anemone shrimp. We quantified growth, sexual reproduction, senescence, and mortality in individuals of A. pedersoni under laboratory conditions and their abundance and population size structure on coral reefs in St. Thomas, U.S. Virgin Islands. Von Bertalanffy growth curves were fitted to the data to determine age-size relationships, and the Beverton-Holt model was used to estimate mortality rates and size at maximum yield. Individuals grew rapidly when young, then slowed their growth after reaching sexual maturity at similar to 6 months. Individuals were gonochoric, with males attaining significantly smaller body sizes and shorter life spans than did females. Prior to death at <2 years, members of both genders exhibited senescence during which they ceased reproducing, shrank (females only), and decreased their activity levels over similar to 1-4 weeks. Field populations were abundant and composed mostly of juveniles during both years examined. Populations appeared to be stable but highly dynamic in terms of individuals, reaching maximum yield at 4 months of age. We conclude that obligate symbiosis with large sea anemones and cleaner mutualism with reef fishes both contribute to explaining aspects of the life history of Pederson shrimps, especially their apparent mating system of pure-search polygynandry. This life-history information also provides a scientific basis for sustainable fishery management and aquaculture of this key coral reef organism.
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0006-3185
EI 1939-8697
PD DEC
PY 2017
VL 233
IS 3
BP 190
EP 205
DI 10.1086/695802
SC Life Sciences & Biomedicine - Other Topics; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000427998200002
PM 29553816
ER

PT J
AU Freese, HM
   Sikorski, J
   Bunk, B
   Scheuner, C
   Meier-Kolthoff, JP
   Sproer, C
   Gram, L
   Overmann, J
AF Freese, Heike M.
   Sikorski, Johannes
   Bunk, Boyke
   Scheuner, Carmen
   Meier-Kolthoff, Jan P.
   Sproeer, Cathrin
   Gram, Lone
   Overmann, Joerg
TI Trajectories and Drivers of Genome Evolution in Surface-Associated
   Marine Phaeobacter
SO GENOME BIOLOGY AND EVOLUTION
DT Article
DE population genomics; gene flow; gene transfer agent; horizontal gene
   transfer; ecological niche; bacterial adaptation
ID INHIBENS DSM 17395; ROSEOBACTER CLADE; GENE-TRANSFER;
   HAEMATOCOCCUS-PLUVIALIS; BACTERIAL COMMUNITIES; ETHYLENE PRODUCTION;
   MAXIMUM-LIKELIHOOD; ATTACHED BACTERIA; ORGANIC-MATTER; SARGASSO SEA
AB The extent of genome divergence and the evolutionary events leading to speciation of marine bacteria have mostly been studied for (locally) abundant, free-living groups. The genus Phaeobacter is found on different marine surfaces, seems to occupy geographically disjunct habitats, and is involved in different biotic interactions, and was therefore targeted in the present study. The analysis of the chromosomes of 32 closely related but geographically spread Phaeobacter strains revealed an exceptionally large, highly syntenic core genome. The flexible gene pool is constantly but slightly expanding across all Phaeobacter lineages. The horizontally transferred genes mostly originated from bacteria of the Roseobacter group and horizontal transfer most likely was mediated by gene transfer agents. No evidence for geographic isolation and habitat specificity of the different phylogenomic Phaeobacter clades was detected based on the sources of isolation. In contrast, the functional gene repertoire and physiological traits of different phylogenomic Phaeobacter clades were sufficiently distinct to suggest an adaptation to an associated lifestyle with algae, to additional nutrient sources, or toxic heavy metals. Our study reveals that the evolutionary trajectories of surface-associated marine bacteria can differ significantly from free-living marine bacteria or marine generalists.
OI Meier-Kolthoff, Jan Philipp/0000-0001-9105-9814; Gram,
   Lone/0000-0002-1076-5723
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 1759-6653
PD DEC
PY 2017
VL 9
IS 12
BP 3297
EP 3311
DI 10.1093/gbe/evx249
SC Evolutionary Biology; Genetics & Heredity
UT WOS:000423460600007
PM 29194520
ER

PT J
AU Zeni, JO
   Hoeinghaus, DJ
   Casatti, L
AF Zeni, Jaquelini O.
   Hoeinghaus, David J.
   Casatti, Lilian
TI Effects of pasture conversion to sugarcane for biofuel production on
   stream fish assemblages in tropical agroecosystems
SO FRESHWATER BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE Anthropocene; functional traits; homogenisation; land-use change; legacy
   effect
ID LAND-USE; ETHANOL-PRODUCTION; HABITAT QUALITY; ATLANTIC FOREST;
   BETA-DIVERSITY; BIODIVERSITY; WATER; ENVIRONMENT; EXTINCTION; COMMUNITY
AB 1. One of the main causes of biodiversity loss in aquatic ecosystems is instream habitat change associated with land-use change in the drainage basin. Biofuel crop production is an increasingly important driver of land-use change in existing agricultural drainage basins. Conceptually, biofuels such as sugarcane (Saccharum spp.: Poaceea) can provide a sustainable alternative to fossil fuels, but little is known about the consequences of biofuel crop production for biodiversity. Thus, our aim was to investigate if and how the degree of further environmental changes at regional and local scales can influence taxonomic and functional structure of fish assemblages in agroecosystem streams.
   2. We quantified drainage basin land use, instream and riparian habitat, and fish assemblages in 38 agroecosystem streams in Brazil with drainage basins experiencing rapid expansion of sugarcane production, and calculated degree of environmental change and corresponding response in taxonomic and functional structure of stream fish assemblages. Procrustes and redundancy analyses tested for correlation between land use and instream habitat and environmental factors correlated with fish assemblage structure, respectively. Previous studies demonstrated relationships between land-use change, instream habitat change and taxonomic and functional structure of stream fish assemblages. Therefore, we used regression to test the hypothesis that degree of environmental change is positively correlated with magnitude of change in taxonomic and functional structure of fish assemblages.
   3. Primary gradients of environmental change included conversion of pasture to sugarcane and reduction of stream width, depth and volume. Although drainage basin and instream attributes were not correlated within a year, we detected a legacy effect of land use on instream habitat. The degree of environmental change was not significantly correlated with taxonomic or functional changes in stream fish assemblages in most cases. However, abundances of resistant taxa increased, whereas nektonic functional groups decreased, and the biological response also presented evidence of a legacy effect.
   \4. Our findings demonstrate that instream habitat and aquatic biodiversity in streams with agricultural drainage basins undergoing rapid conversion to biofuel production likely will not experience the full magnitude of responses in the short term. Therefore, repeated sampling of sufficient duration to account for legacy effects or time lags is needed to test for effects of biofuel expansion on biodiversity, and similarly to assess whether management practices such as riparian zone preservation can benefit biodiversity in agroecosystems.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0046-5070
EI 1365-2427
PD DEC
PY 2017
VL 62
IS 12
BP 2026
EP 2038
DI 10.1111/fwb.13047
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000423267400006
ER

PT J
AU Wang, C
   Liu, Y
   Zhan, Q
   Yang, WL
   Wu, NC
AF Wang, Chao
   Liu, Yang
   Zhan, Qin
   Yang, Wanling
   Wu, Naicheng
TI Global trends in phytoplankton research of river ecosystems during
   1991-2016: A bibliometric analysis
SO FUNDAMENTAL AND APPLIED LIMNOLOGY
DT Article
DE river; phytoplankton; bibliometric analysis; bioindicators; aquatic food
   web
ID DIATOM-BASED INDEX; LARGE SUBTROPICAL RIVER; SCIENCE-CITATION-INDEX;
   BIOTIC INTEGRITY; FOOD-WEB; GUADIANA ESTUARY; STABLE-ISOTOPE; SCIENTIFIC
   PUBLICATION; COMMUNITY COMPOSITION; ALLOCHTHONOUS CARBON
AB Rivers are representative lotic freshwater ecosystems and are regarded as the lotic belt for transportation of nutrients and pollutants from the land to the sea. To understand the global research profile and fronts of river phytoplankton, 13,434 publications regarding river phytoplankton indexed by Web of Science during 1991-2016 were analyzed using a bibliometric approach. The EU Water Framework Directive presents a good case for promoting not only frequent cooperation between European countries but also the development of river phytoplankton studies. Such directives are anticipated to promote global consistency of the water evaluations and management in the future. Phytoplankton play important roles in bio-assessments and energy flow of river ecosystems. The trait-based method has many advantages compared with traditional methods based on community composition and metric indices. The trait-based method considers a complex mixture of stressors by combining qualitative and quantitative parameters but also transfers different geographic taxonomic compositions to a similar complement of traits. Moreover, phytoplankton-based food chains are generally considered to transfer energy and carbon more efficiently to higher trophic levels than bacterial-based food chains. Algae are a high-quality food for higher trophic levels, compared with bacteria and terrestrial material. The algal component of periphyton has been demonstrated to be the major basal component of stream food webs.
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 1863-9135
PD DEC
PY 2017
VL 191
IS 1
BP 25
EP 36
DI 10.1127/fal/2017/1051
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000419313600003
ER

PT J
AU Barnum, TR
   Weller, DE
   Williams, M
AF Barnum, Thomas R.
   Weller, Donald E.
   Williams, Meghan
TI Urbanization reduces and homogenizes trait diversity in stream
   macroinvertebrate communities
SO ECOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS
DT Article
DE Appalachian; Coastal Plain; disturbance; environmental filter;
   functional traits; hydrology; impervious surface; Piedmont; quantile
   regression
ID CONTERMINOUS UNITED-STATES; LIFE-HISTORY STRATEGIES; FUNCTIONAL
   DIVERSITY; MULTIPLE STRESSORS; BENTHIC MACROINVERTEBRATES; ENVIRONMENTAL
   GRADIENTS; BIOLOGICAL TRAITS; FISH ASSEMBLAGES; LIMITING FACTORS;
   FRESH-WATER
AB More than one-half of the world's population lives in urban areas, so quantifying the effects of urbanization on ecological communities is important for understanding whether anthropogenic stressors homogenize communities across environmental and climatic gradients. We examined the relationship of impervious surface coverage (a marker of urbanization) and the structure of stream macroinvertebrate communities across the state of Maryland and within each of Maryland's three ecoregions: Coastal Plain, Piedmont, and Appalachian, which differ in stream geomorphology and community composition. We considered three levels of trait organization: individual traits, unique combinations of traits, and community metrics (functional richness, functional evenness, and functional divergence) and three levels of impervious surface coverage (low [<2.5%], medium [2.5% to 10%], and high [>10%]). The prevalence of an individual trait differed very little between low impervious surface and high impervious surface sites. The arrangement of trait combinations in community trait space for each ecoregion differed when impervious surface coverage was low, but the arrangement became more similar among ecoregions as impervious surface coverage increased. Furthermore, trait combinations that occurred only at low or medium impervious surface coverage were clustered in a subset of the community trait space, indicating that impervious surface affected the presence of only a subset of trait combinations. Functional richness declined with increasing impervious surface, providing evidence for environmental filtering. Community metrics that include abundance were also sensitive to increasing impervious surface coverage: functional divergence decreased while functional evenness increased. These changes demonstrate that increasing impervious surface coverage homogenizes the trait diversity of macroinvertebrate communities in streams, despite differences in initial community composition and stream geomorphology among ecoregions. Community metrics were also more sensitive to changes in the abundance rather than the gain or loss of trait combinations, showing the potential for trait-based approaches to serve as early warning indicators of environmental stress for monitoring and biological assessment programs.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1051-0761
EI 1939-5582
PD DEC
PY 2017
VL 27
IS 8
BP 2428
EP 2442
DI 10.1002/eap.1619
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000416862700014
ER

PT J
AU Latli, A
   Descy, JP
   Mondy, CP
   Floury, M
   Viroux, L
   Otjacques, W
   Marescaux, J
   Depiereux, E
   Ovidio, M
   Usseglio-Polatera, P
   Kestemont, P
AF Latli, Adrien
   Descy, Jean-Pierre
   Mondy, Cedric P.
   Floury, Mathieu
   Viroux, Laurent
   Otjacques, William
   Marescaux, Jonathan
   Depiereux, Eric
   Ovidio, Michael
   Usseglio-Polatera, Philippe
   Kestemont, Patrick
TI Long-term trends in trait structure of riverine communities facing
   predation risk increase and trophic resource decline
SO ECOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS
DT Article
DE cascading effect; exotic species; fish; global warming;
   macroinvertebrate; multiple stressors; water quality
ID MUSSELS DREISSENA-POLYMORPHA; FRESH-WATER BIODIVERSITY; CO-INERTIA
   ANALYSIS; CLIMATE-CHANGE; MACROINVERTEBRATE COMMUNITIES; ZEBRA MUSSELS;
   STREAM MACROINVERTEBRATES; CONSERVATION BIOLOGY; CORMORANT PREDATION;
   FISH COMMUNITIES
AB Many large European rivers have undergone multiple pressures that have strongly impaired ecosystem functioning at different spatial and temporal scales. Global warming and other environmental changes have favored the success of invasive species, deeply modifying the structure of aquatic communities in large rivers. Some exogenous species could alter trophic interactions within assemblages by increasing the predation risk for potential prey species (top-down effect) and limiting the dynamics of others via resource availability limitation (bottom-up effect). Furthermore, large transboundary rivers are complex aquatic ecosystems that have often been poorly investigated so that data for assessing long-term ecological trends are missing. In this study, we propose an original approach for investigating long-term combined effects of global warming, trophic resource decrease, predation risk, and water quality variations on the trait-based structure of macroinvertebrate and fish assemblages over 26 yr (1985-2011) and 427-km stretch of the river Meuse (France and Belgium). The study of temporal variations in biological, physiological, and ecological traits of macroinvertebrate and fish allowed identifying community trends and distinguishing impacts of environmental perturbations from those induced by biological alterations. We provide evidence, for this large European river, of an increase in water temperature (close to 1 degrees C) and a decrease in phytoplankton biomass (-85%), as well as independent effects of these changes on both invertebrate and fish communities. The reduction of trophic resources in the water column by invasive molluscs has dramatically affected the density of omnivorous fish in favor of invertebrate feeders, while scrapers became the major feeding guild among invertebrates. Macroinvertebrate and fish communities have shifted from large-sized organisms with low fecundity to prolific, small-sized organisms, with early maturity, as a response to increased predation pressure.
OI Ovidio, Michael/0000-0002-0136-5840
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1051-0761
EI 1939-5582
PD DEC
PY 2017
VL 27
IS 8
BP 2458
EP 2474
DI 10.1002/eap.1621
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000416862700016
ER

PT J
AU Kruk, C
   Segura, AM
   Nogueira, L
   Alcantara, I
   Calliari, D
   de la Escalera, GM
   Carballo, C
   Cabrera, C
   Sarthou, F
   Scavone, P
   Piccini, C
AF Kruk, Carla
   Segura, Angel M.
   Nogueira, Lucia
   Alcantara, Ignacio
   Calliari, Danilo
   Martinez de la Escalera, Gabriela
   Carballo, Carmela
   Cabrera, Carolina
   Sarthou, Florencia
   Scavone, Paola
   Piccini, Claudia
TI A multilevel trait-based approach to the ecological performance of
   Microcystis aeruginosa complex from headwaters to the ocean
SO HARMFUL ALGAE
DT Article
DE Traits; Toxic blooms; Temperature; Salinity; Cyanobacteria;
   Headwaters-Ocean
ID DE-LA-PLATA; CYANOBACTERIUM MICROCYSTIS; CLIMATE-CHANGE; SWAN RIVER;
   PHYTOPLANKTON COMMUNITY; HARMFUL CYANOBACTERIA; VERTICAL-DISTRIBUTION;
   FUNCTIONAL-GROUPS; DIFFERENT SIZES; SHALLOW LAKES
AB The Microcystis aeruginosa complex (MAC) clusters cosmopolitan and conspicuous harmful bloom forming cyanobacteria able to produce cyanotoxins. It is hypothesized that low temperatures and brackish salinities are the main barriers to MAC proliferation. Here, patterns at multiple levels of organization irrespective of taxonomic identity (i.e. a trait-based approach) were analyzed. MAC responses from the intracellular (e.g. respiratory activity) to the ecosystem level (e.g. blooms) were evaluated in wide environmental gradients. Experimental results on buoyancy and respiratory activity in response to increased salinity (0-35) and a literature review of maximum growth rates under different temperatures and salinities were combined with field sampling from headwaters (800 km upstream) to the marine end of the Rio de la Plata estuary (Uruguay-South America). Salinity and temperature were the major variables affecting MAC responses. Experimentally, freshwater MAC cells remained active for 24 h in brackish waters (salinity = 15) while colonies increased their flotation velocity. At the population level, maximum growth rate decreased with salinity and presented a unimodal exponential response with temperature, showing an optimum at 27.5 degrees C and a rapid decrease thereafter. At the community and ecosystem levels, MAC occurred from fresh to marine waters (salinity 30) with a sustained relative increase of large mucilaginous colonies biovolume with respect to individual cells. Similarly, total biomass and, specific and morphological richness decreased with salinity while blooms were only detected in freshwater both at high (33 degrees C) and low (11 degrees C) temperatures. In brackish waters, large mucilaginous colonies presented advantages under osmotic restrictive conditions. These traits values have also been associated with higher toxicity potential. This suggest salinity or low temperatures would not represent effective barriers for the survival and transport of potentially toxic MAC under likely near future scenarios of increasing human impacts (i.e. eutrophication, dam construction and climate change). (C) 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
OI Piccini, Claudia/0000-0002-2762-1953
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 1568-9883
EI 1878-1470
PD DEC
PY 2017
VL 70
BP 23
EP 36
DI 10.1016/j.hal.2017.10.004
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000418311500002
PM 29169566
ER

PT J
AU Campos, CC
   Garcia, TM
   Neumann-Leitao, S
   Soares, MO
AF Campos, C. C.
   Garcia, T. M.
   Neumann-Leitao, S.
   Soares, M. O.
TI Ecological indicators and functional groups of copepod assemblages
SO ECOLOGICAL INDICATORS
DT Article
DE Zooplankton; Functional diversity; Continental shelf; Invasive species
ID MARINE PLANKTONIC COPEPODS; GREAT-BARRIER-REEF; CONTINENTAL-SHELF;
   ZOOPLANKTON COMMUNITIES; NORTHEASTERN BRAZIL; ESTUARINE SYSTEM;
   TEMORA-TURBINATA; COASTAL WATERS; BAY; CALANOIDA
AB Copepods are important ecological indicators of ecosystem functioning. In this study, we analyzed the structure of copepod assemblages and cross-shelf patterns based on functional traits and indicator value analysis. Copepod samples were collected from 54 stations distributed along the inner, middle, and outer continental shelves covering a wide geographical area (20,100 km(2)). Overall, 38 species were identified: 20 Calanoida, 14 Cyclopoida, and 4 Harpacticoida. Copepod density was the highest in the inner shelf profile, with richness and diversity being higher on the outer shelf dose to the shelf break. The results suggest that there is a gradient of zooplankton distribution even on narrow (< 50 cm) continental shelves. The cluster analysis of the stations showed a tendency to form three groups largely corresponding to physical location. Two major functional groups were identified, sorted by spawning strategy. These were subdivided according to the trophic regime and feeding strategy. Temora turbinata (alien species), Clausocalanus furcatus, and Ditrichocorycaeus amazonicus (native species) were found to be ecological indicators. These species have different functional traits and distinct cross-shelf distributions, where the alien species dominates the turbid coastal waters, and C. furcatus is an indicator of outer shelf waters. Thus, these species can be considered ecological indicators of the different continental shelf waters. The results indicate that it is necessary to understand the functional diversity and ecological indicators of co-pepods, considering their importance for the basis of marine food webs.
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 1470-160X
EI 1872-7034
PD DEC
PY 2017
VL 83
BP 416
EP 426
DI 10.1016/j.ecolind.2017.08.018
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000417551800040
ER

PT J
AU Carlson, BE
   Langkilde, T
AF Carlson, Bradley E.
   Langkilde, Tracy
TI Body size variation in aquatic consumers causes pervasive community
   effects, independent of mean body size
SO ECOLOGY AND EVOLUTION
DT Article
DE body size; intraspecific trait variation; size structure; tadpoles;
   zooplankton
ID PREDATION RISK; NOTOPHTHALMUS-VIRIDESCENS; FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY;
   EXPERIMENTAL ECOLOGY; ECOSYSTEM PROCESSES; GENETIC DIVERSITY; CURRENT
   KNOWLEDGE; RANA-SYLVATICA; ANURAN LARVAE; FRESH-WATER
AB Intraspecific phenotypic variation is a significant component of biodiversity. Body size, for example, is variable and critical for structuring communities. We need to understand how homogenous and variably sized populations differ in their ecological responses or effects if we are to have a robust understanding of communities. We manipulated body size variation in consumer (tadpole) populations in mesocosms (both with and without predators), keeping mean size and density of these consumers constant. Size-variable consumer populations exhibited stronger antipredator responses (reduced activity), which had a cascading effect of increasing the biomass of the consumer's resources. Predators foraged less when consumers were variable in size, and this may have mediated the differential effects of predators on the community composition of alternative prey (zooplankton). All trophic levels responded to differences in consumer size variation, demonstrating that intrapopulation phenotypic variability can significantly alter interspecific ecological interactions. Furthermore, we identify a key mechanism (size thresholds for predation risk) that may mediate impacts of size variation in natural communities. Together, our results suggest that phenotypic variability plays a significant role in structuring ecological communities.
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 2045-7758
PD DEC
PY 2017
VL 7
IS 23
BP 9978
EP 9990
DI 10.1002/ece3.3511
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000417754100011
PM 29238530
ER

PT J
AU Malerba, ME
   White, CR
   Marshall, DJ
AF Malerba, Martino E.
   White, Craig R.
   Marshall, Dustin J.
TI Phytoplankton size-scaling of net-energy flux across light and biomass
   gradients
SO ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE geometric biology; Kleiber's rule; light utilization;
   photosynthesis-irradiance (P-I) curve; phylogenetic mixed models;
   phytoplankton allometry; population density; respiration rates
ID FUNCTION-VALUED TRAITS; BODY-SIZE; CELL-SIZE; MARINE-PHYTOPLANKTON;
   METABOLIC-RATE; POPULATION-DENSITY; GENERAL-MODEL; LIFE-HISTORY;
   CHEMICAL-COMPOSITION; FUNCTIONAL TRAITS
AB Many studies examine how body size mediates energy use, but few investigate how size simultaneously regulates energy acquisition. Furthermore, rarely energy fluxes are examined while accounting for the role of biotic and abiotic factors in which they are nested. These limitations contribute to an incomplete understanding of how size affects the transfer of energy through individuals, populations, and communities. Here we characterized photosynthesis-irradiance (P-I) curves and per-cell net-energy use for 21 phytoplankton species spanning across four orders of magnitude of size and seven phyla, each measured across six light intensities and four population densities. We then used phylogenetic mixed models to quantify how body size influences the energy turnover rates of a species, and how this changes across environments. Rate-parameters for the P-I curve and net-energy budgets were mostly highly correlated and consistent with an allometric size-scaling exponent of <1. The energy flux of a cell decreased with population density and increased with light intensity, but the effect of body size remained constant across all combinations of treatment levels (i.e. no size x population density interaction). The negative effect of population density on photosynthesis and respiration is mostly consistent with an active downregulation of metabolic rates following a decrease in per-cell resource availability, possibly as an adaptive strategy to reduce the minimum requirements of a cell and improve its competitive ability. Also, because an increase in body size corresponds to a less-than-proportional increase in net-energy (i.e. exponent<1), we propose that volume-specific net-energy flux can represent an important cost of evolving larger body sizes in autotrophic single-cell organisms.
OI White, Craig/0000-0002-0200-2187; Malerba, Martino
   E./0000-0002-7480-4779
TC 5
Z9 5
SN 0012-9658
EI 1939-9170
PD DEC
PY 2017
VL 98
IS 12
BP 3106
EP 3115
DI 10.1002/ecy.2032
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000416863500012
PM 28940445
ER

PT J
AU Escobar-Toledo, F
   Zetina-Rejon, MJ
   Ramos-Miranda, J
   Arreguin-Sanchez, F
AF Escobar-Toledo, F.
   Zetina-Rejon, M. J.
   Ramos-Miranda, J.
   Arreguin-Sanchez, F.
TI Temporal shifts in functional traits of the fish community in Terminos
   Lagoon (Mexico) in three periods (1980, 1998 and 2011)
SO ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY OF FISHES
DT Article
DE Functional diversity; Functional structure; Functional traits; Terminos
   Lagoon; Gulf of Mexico
ID HABITAT DEGRADATION; COASTAL LAGOON; CLIMATE-CHANGE; DIVERSITY;
   ASSEMBLAGES; REDUNDANCY
AB The trophic structure of the fish community ecosystem in the Terminos Lagoon (southern Gulf of Mexico) has shown a range of functional changes. The description of the heterogeneity of functional traits in a biological community allows the identification of the relevant functions in an ecosystem. An analysis was conducted of the functional traits (trophic level, reproductive and trophic guild, habitat, estuary use, essential habitat, salinity tolerance, body shape, mouth type, caudal fin type, and maximum length) of the fish community of the lagoon for three different years (1980, 1998 and 2011). We developed a new index to analyze the variation of functional diversity called the functional traits diversity index (FADI). This index takes into account the abundance of traits and emphasizes less common traits (i.e., those that are less redundant). The functional redundancy was different in the three periods studied. The FADI value for 1998 was the highest and was outside of the expected probability distribution, indicating a greater abundance of species with unique functional traits. A principal components analysis was performed to assess the relative contribution of functional traits to the overall variance of functional diversity over the three periods. We found that the trophic level, body shape, and mouth type were the most influential traits in the functional diversity changes. The environmental changes were correlated with the variability of the functional structure. Depth was the most influential environmental variable in the principal component analysis. The results indicate a reorganization of the functional structure of the fish community in the Terminos Lagoon. The FADI was helpful in explaining these changes observed throughout the three periods studied.
RI Zetina-Rejon, Manuel/A-5974-2008
OI Zetina-Rejon, Manuel/0000-0002-7181-9828
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0378-1909
EI 1573-5133
PD DEC
PY 2017
VL 100
IS 12
BP 1575
EP 1586
DI 10.1007/s10641-017-0666-2
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000417067100005
ER

PT J
AU Coles, VJ
   Stukel, MR
   Brooks, MT
   Burd, A
   Crump, BC
   Moran, MA
   Paul, JH
   Satinsky, BM
   Yager, PL
   Zielinski, BL
   Hood, RR
AF Coles, V. J.
   Stukel, M. R.
   Brooks, M. T.
   Burd, A.
   Crump, B. C.
   Moran, M. A.
   Paul, J. H.
   Satinsky, B. M.
   Yager, P. L.
   Zielinski, B. L.
   Hood, R. R.
TI Ocean biogeochemistry modeled with emergent trait-based genomics
SO SCIENCE
DT Article
ID AMAZON RIVER PLUME; NORTH-ATLANTIC OCEAN; EXPRESSION PATTERNS; MARINE
   DIATOMS; PHYTOPLANKTON; TRANSPORT; GROWTH; SIZE; BIOGEOGRAPHY;
   COMMUNITIES
AB Marine ecosystem models have advanced to incorporate metabolic pathways discovered with genomic sequencing, but direct comparisons between models and "omics" data are lacking. We developed a model that directly simulates metagenomes and metatranscriptomes for comparison with observations. Model microbes were randomly assigned genes for specialized functions, and communities of 68 species were simulated in the Atlantic Ocean. Unfit organisms were replaced, and the model self-organized to develop community genomes and transcriptomes. Emergent communities from simulations that were initialized with different cohorts of randomly generated microbes all produced realistic vertical and horizontal ocean nutrient, genome, and transcriptome gradients. Thus, the library of gene functions available to the community, rather than the distribution of functions among specific organisms, drove community assembly and biogeochemical gradients in the model ocean.
RI Yager, Patricia/K-8020-2014
OI Yager, Patricia/0000-0002-8462-6427; Moran, Mary
   Ann/0000-0002-0702-8167; Coles, Victoria/0000-0002-7247-0007; Crump,
   Byron/0000-0001-7062-1273; Satinsky, Brandon/0000-0002-6794-2663
TC 6
Z9 6
SN 0036-8075
EI 1095-9203
PD DEC 1
PY 2017
VL 358
IS 6367
BP 1149
EP 1154
DI 10.1126/science.aan5712
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000416584000033
PM 29191900
ER

PT J
AU Zhang, Y
   Shi, GR
   Wu, HT
   Yang, TL
   He, WH
   Yuan, AH
   Lei, Y
AF Zhang, Yang
   Shi, G. R.
   Wu, Hui-ting
   Yang, Ting-lu
   He, Wei-hong
   Yuan, Ai-hua
   Lei, Yong
TI Community replacement, ecological shift and early warning signals prior
   to the end-Permian mass extinction: A case study from a nearshore
   clastic-shelf section in South China
SO PALAEOGEOGRAPHY PALAEOCLIMATOLOGY PALAEOECOLOGY
DT Article
DE Permian-Triassic boundary; Benthonic ecosystem; Regime shift; Disaster
   group; Zhongzhai section
ID BODY-SIZE CHANGES; SOUTHWESTERN GUIZHOU PROVINCE; TRIASSIC BOUNDARY
   SECTION; ZHONGZHAI SECTION; FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; LINGULIDAE
   BRACHIOPODA; ECOSYSTEM RECOVERY; BIOTIC RECOVERY; FOSSIL RECORD;
   LOW-OXYGEN
AB A quantitative investigation of the ecological changes of shallow-marine benthos was undertaken at the Permian-Triassic boundary section at Zhongzhai, South China. The studied fossil material primarily included brachiopods and bivalves owing to their abundance throughout the section, but other subordinate taxonomic groups including ostracods and microgastropods were also integrated for discussion.
   Overall, a succession of three benthonic paleocommunities was recognized representing three connected ecological evolutionary stages across the Permian-Triassic transition. Both Stage 1 and Stage 2 paleocommunities predated the end-Permian boundary mass extinction, and were characterized by relatively high diversity of brachiopods and bivalves, with no or very rare other taxa. Approaching the end-Permian mass extinction and the PTB itself, the paleocommunity abruptly changed and was replaced by the Stage 2 paleocommunity that was characterized by a relatively low Shannon's diversity (H) coupled with a high Simpson's dominance index (D) and, most notably, a changeover from Neochonetes to Tethyochonetes (both are brachiopod genera) as the most significant ecological dominants. This Simpson's dominance index (D) shift correlates well with food shortage (i.e. much reduced terrestrial influx and acritarch abundance), and is therefore interpreted to signify, possibly, intensified interspecific competitions with Tethyochonetes seemingly outcompeting Neochonetes presumably due to its preadapted smaller body size. The post-extinction (Stage 3) paleocommunity is distinguished by a highly characteristic low-diversity and high-abundance fauna comprised mainly of lingulid brachiopods, Claraia bivalves, microgastropods and ostracods, suggesting a unique and highly stressful ecological regime. In this paleocommunity, Claraia might have acted like a "disaster taxon" and, as such, its ecological functional role in the paleocommunity was activated and elevated because of exceptional ecological conditions (e.g., anoxia, hyperthermal and/or severe food shortage).
   From the studied section, a number of ecological traits including species abundance distribution, Shannon's diversity (H), community dominance and body-size structure were identified as demonstrating significant changes accompanying community replacement prior to the end-Permian mass extinction. The fact that these changes preceded the mass extinction may suggest that these traits could represent some early warning signals for an impending ecological regime shift. This extended interpretation clearly has significant implications for modern ecological studies to predict future impending ecological regime shifts.
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 0031-0182
EI 1872-616X
PD DEC 1
PY 2017
VL 487
BP 118
EP 135
DI 10.1016/j.palaeo.2017.07.042
SC Physical Geography; Geology; Paleontology
UT WOS:000414881100010
ER

PT J
AU D'Aloia, CC
   Daigle, RM
   Cote, IM
   Curtis, JMR
   Guichard, F
   Fortin, MJ
AF D'Aloia, Cassidy C.
   Daigle, Remi M.
   Cote, Isabelle M.
   Curtis, Janelle M. R.
   Guichard, Frederic
   Fortin, Marie-Josee
TI A multiple-species framework for integrating movement processes across
   life stages into the design of marine protected areas
SO BIOLOGICAL CONSERVATION
DT Article
DE Pelagic larval duration; Home range; Marxan; MPA; Movement; Larval
   dispersal
ID REEF FISH; BRITISH-COLUMBIA; MODEL SIMULATION; CORAL-REEFS;
   CONNECTIVITY; CONSERVATION; SIZE; RESERVES; DISPERSAL; NETWORKS
AB A major objective of marine protected area (MPA) network design is to ensure the persistence of species with diverse life histories and functional traits. Considering how species differ in their propensity to move within and between MPAs is therefore a key consideration for multi-species MPA network design. Here, we propose a conceptual framework to incorporate ecological processes that affect movement at multiple life stages into the MPA network design process. We illustrate how our framework can be implemented using a set of hypothetical species that represent regional trait diversity in coastal British Columbia, Canada. We focused on two ecological processes: (1) dispersal during the larval phase and (2) daily home range movement during the adult phase. To identify functional connectivity patterns, we used a biophysical model to simulate larval dispersal, and then prioritized highly-connected patches using a reserve selection algorithm. To ensure that individual reserves were commensurate with home ranges, we also imposed reserve size constraints. Candidate areas for protection were identified based on multi-species connectivity patterns and home range size constraints. Collectively, this conceptual framework offers a flexible approach to multi-species, cross-life stage conservation planning, which can be further adapted to address complex life histories. As marine conservation efforts around the globe aim to design ecologically connected networks of protected areas, the integration of movement and connectivity data throughout ontogeny will be a key component of effective multi-species MPA network design.
RI Shen, ChengHan/D-1972-2018
OI Daigle, Remi/0000-0001-8832-4189
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 0006-3207
EI 1873-2917
PD DEC
PY 2017
VL 216
BP 93
EP 100
DI 10.1016/j.biocon.2017.10.012
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000414883100012
ER

PT J
AU Brischoux, F
   Kornilev, YV
   Lillywhite, HB
AF Brischoux, Francois
   Kornilev, Yurii V.
   Lillywhite, Harvey B.
TI Physiological and behavioral responses to salinity in coastal Dice
   snakes
SO COMPARATIVE BIOCHEMISTRY AND PHYSIOLOGY A-MOLECULAR & INTEGRATIVE
   PHYSIOLOGY
DT Article
DE Marine life; Natrix tessellata; Osmolality; Plasma sodium
ID SEA-SNAKES; LATICAUDA SPP.; FRESH-WATER; DRINKING BEHAVIOR; SALT-GLANDS;
   SODIUM; SKIN; DEHYDRATION; DISCRIMINATION; ESTUARINE
AB Secondarily marine tetrapods have evolved adaptations to maintain their osmotic balance in a hyperosmotic environment. During the transition to a marine habitat, the evolution of a euryhaline physiology likely encompassed successive changes in behavior and physiology that released organisms from regular access to fresh water. Deciphering these key steps is a complicated task. In this study, we investigated a species of freshwater natricine snake in which some populations are known to use marine environments. We experimentally subjected 30 adult Dice snakes (Natrix tessellata) from a population inhabiting the Black Sea coast to three salinities corresponding to freshwater (similar to 0.1 parts per thousand), brackish water (similar to 15.0 parts per thousand), and full-strength seawater (similar to 34.0 parts per thousand) in order to investigate their physiological (variation of body mass, osmolality) and behavioral (activity, drinking behavior) responses to salinity. Our results show that coastal Dice snakes from the study population are relatively tolerant to salinity close to that recorded in the Black Sea, but that prolonged exposure to full-strength seawater increases osmolality, stimulates thirst, decreases the activity of snakes and may ultimately jeopardize survival. Collectively with previously published data, our results strongly suggest specific physiological adaptations to withstand hyperosmolality rather than to reduce intake of salt, in coastal populations or species of semi-aquatic snakes. Future comparative investigations of Dice snakes from populations restricted to freshwater environment might reveal the functional traits and the behavioral and physiological responses of coastal N. tessellata to life in water with elevated salinity.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1095-6433
EI 1531-4332
PD DEC
PY 2017
VL 214
BP 13
EP 18
DI 10.1016/j.cbpa.2017.09.003
SC Biochemistry & Molecular Biology; Physiology; Zoology
UT WOS:000414814900002
PM 28893666
ER

PT J
AU Gillard, M
   Thiebaut, G
   Rossignol, N
   Berardocco, S
   Deleu, C
AF Gillard, Morgane
   Thiebaut, Gabrielle
   Rossignol, Nicolas
   Berardocco, Solenne
   Deleu, Carole
TI Impact of climate warming on carbon metabolism and on morphology of
   invasive and native aquatic plant species varies between spring and
   summer
SO ENVIRONMENTAL AND EXPERIMENTAL BOTANY
DT Article
DE Biological invasion; Climate change; Functional traits; Macrophytes;
   Metabolic profiling; Photoassimilates
ID WATER; MACROPHYTES; GROWTH; PHOTOSYNTHESIS; TEMPERATURE; LUDWIGIA;
   SUCCESS; BIODIVERSITY; REGENERATION; ANGIOSPERMS
AB The rise of global surface temperature by between 1.2 degrees C and 4 degrees C by 2100 is expected to affect freshwater ecosystems and the growth of aquatic plants. By extending the distribution range of invasive macrophytes, climate warming could increase their management costs. The aim of this study was to test the impact of a 3 degrees C warming in spring and in summer on the morphology and physiology of two native species (Mentha aquatica, Myosotis scorpioides) and two invasive species (Ludwigia hexapetala, Myriophyllum aquaticton) under controlled conditions. Our study showed that the increase of spring temperature induced morphological modifications for all species, while a 3 C warming induced changes in carbohydrates composition for native species in spring, and modification of carbohydrate content for invasive species at both seasons. Patterns of carbohydrate content group the two invasive species together, possibly highlighting common physiological mechanisms. Moreover, the increase of spring temperature favoured the apical and/or lateral growth solely for invasive species. Hence, the invasive species specific response to warming suggests that higher temperature may favour their growth in spring, which might allow them to colonise the water column earlier than natives. This competitive advantage could affect aquatic ecosystems functioning and biodiversity in the coming years.
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0098-8472
EI 1873-7307
PD DEC
PY 2017
VL 144
BP 1
EP 10
DI 10.1016/j.envexpbot.2017.09.009
SC Plant Sciences; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000414891400001
ER

PT J
AU Jablonski, D
AF Jablonski, David
TI Approaches to Macroevolution: 2. Sorting of Variation, Some Overarching
   Issues, and General Conclusions
SO EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE Diversification; Evolutionary trends; Hierarchy; Mass extinction;
   Multilevel selection; Paleobiology; Radiation; Species selection;
   Species sorting
ID BODY-SIZE EVOLUTION; PHANEROZOIC TAXONOMIC DIVERSITY;
   CRETACEOUS-PALEOGENE BOUNDARY; MARINE BIODIVERSITY TRENDS; SPECIES-LEVEL
   HERITABILITY; ORNSTEIN-UHLENBECK MODELS; PERMIAN MASS EXTINCTION;
   GEOGRAPHIC RANGE SIZE; FOSSIL RECORD; MORPHOLOGICAL DISPARITY
AB Approaches to macroevolution require integration of its two fundamental components, within a hierarchical framework. Following a companion paper on the origin of variation, I here discuss sorting within an evolutionary hierarchy. Species sorting-sometimes termed species selection in the broad sense, meaning differential origination and extinction owing to intrinsic biological properties-can be split into strict-sense species selection, in which rate differentials are governed by emergent, species-level traits such as geographic range size, and effect macroevolution, in which rates are governed by organism-level traits such as body size; both processes can create hitchhiking effects, indirectly causing the proliferation or decline of other traits. Several methods can operationalize the concept of emergence, so that rigorous separation of these processes is increasingly feasible. A macroevolutionary tradeoff, underlain by the intrinsic traits that influence evolutionary dynamics, causes speciation and extinction rates to covary in many clades, resulting in evolutionary volatility of some clades and more subdued behavior of others; the few clades that break the tradeoff can achieve especially prolific diversification. In addition to intrinsic biological traits at multiple levels, extrinsic events can drive the waxing and waning of clades, and the interaction of traits and events are difficult but important to disentangle. Evolutionary trends can arise in many ways, and at any hierarchical level; descriptive models can be fitted to clade trajectories in phenotypic or functional spaces, but they may not be diagnostic regarding processes, and close attention must be paid to both leading and trailing edges of apparent trends. Biotic interactions can have negative or positive effects on taxonomic diversity within a clade, but cannot be readily extrapolated from the nature of such interactions at the organismic level. The relationships among macroevolutionary currencies through time (taxonomic richness, morphologic disparity, functional variety) are crucial for understanding the nature of evolutionary diversification. A novel approach to diversity-disparity analysis shows that taxonomic diversifications can lag behind, occur in concert with, or precede, increases in disparity. Some overarching issues relating to both the origin and sorting of clades and phenotypes include the macroevolutionary role of mass extinctions, the potential differences between plant and animal macroevolution, whether macroevolutionary processes have changed through geologic time, and the growing human impact on present-day macroevolution. Many challenges remain, but progress is being made on two of the key ones: (a) the integration of variation-generating mechanisms and the multilevel sorting processes that act on that variation, and (b) the integration of paleontological and neontological approaches to historical biology.
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 0071-3260
EI 1934-2845
PD DEC
PY 2017
VL 44
IS 4
BP 451
EP 475
DI 10.1007/s11692-017-9434-7
SC Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000414071800002
PM 29142334
ER

PT J
AU Cai, YJ
   Xu, H
   Vilmi, A
   Tolonen, KT
   Tang, XM
   Qin, BQ
   Gong, ZJ
   Heino, J
AF Cai, Yongjiu
   Xu, Hao
   Vilmi, Annika
   Tolonen, Kimmo T.
   Tang, Xiangming
   Qin, Boqiang
   Gong, Zhijun
   Heino, Jani
TI Relative roles of spatial processes, natural factors and anthropogenic
   stressors in structuring a lake macroinvertebrate metacommunity
SO SCIENCE OF THE TOTAL ENVIRONMENT
DT Article
DE Dispersal; Species sorting; Benthic macroinvertebrates; Traits;
   Community deconstruction; Shallow lakes
ID SHALLOW LAKE; COMMUNITY ECOLOGY; HUMAN DISTURBANCE; DISPERSAL MODE;
   SPECIES DATA; TAIHU; CHINA; EUTROPHICATION; DYNAMICS; CHIRONOMIDAE
AB Studies of aquatic metacommunities have so far been focused almost entirely on relatively isolated systems, such as a set of streams, lakes or ponds. Here, we aimed to quantify the relative importance of spatial processes, natural factors and anthropogenic stressors in structuring of a macroinvertebrate metacommunity within a large, highly-connected shallow lake system. The roles of different drivers were evaluated for the entire metacommunity, 10 trait-based deconstructed metacommunities and four common species by incorporating extensive sampling and a large number of abiotic explanatory variables. Contrary to our expectations, we found that variation in community structure among sites was mostly correlated to spatial and wind-wave variables rather than anthropogenic disturbance factors even though the lake presented strong environmental gradients associated with long-term human pressures. In addition, the relative importance of the three groups of drivers varied slightly among the deconstructed traitmatrices (i.e. based on dispersal ability, feeding mode and degree of occurrence). Importantly, the distributions of the most common species showed significant and strong spatial autocorrelation, indicating the prominent role of high dispersal rate for their distributions. These findings suggest that the influences of high dispersal rates and natural disturbance may even override the roles of anthropogenic stressors in metacommunity organization in highly connected aquatic systems. Hence, we strongly encourage that spatial processes and natural drivers are taken into account in the development of bioassessment approaches in highly-connected aquatic systems. (C) 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
RI Heino, Jani/E-6342-2010; Qin, Boqiang/E-5900-2013
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 0048-9697
EI 1879-1026
PD DEC 1
PY 2017
VL 601
BP 1702
EP 1711
DI 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.05.264
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000406294900164
PM 28618660
ER

PT J
AU Canhoto, C
   Simoes, S
   Goncalves, AL
   Guilhermino, L
   Barlocher, F
AF Canhoto, Cristina
   Simoes, Sara
   Goncalves, Ana Lucia
   Guilhermino, Lucia
   Barlocher, Felix
TI Stream salinization and fungal-mediated leaf decomposition: A microcosm
   study
SO SCIENCE OF THE TOTAL ENVIRONMENT
DT Article
DE Salt tolerance; Streams; Aquatic hyphomycetes; Decomposition; Assemblage
   diversity; Functional redundancy
ID FRESH-WATER; LITTER DECOMPOSITION; COMMUNITY STRUCTURE; HYPHAL
   INTERACTIONS; SALINITY GRADIENT; BIOLOGICAL TRAITS; SEA-WATER;
   DIVERSITY; TEMPERATURE; MACROINVERTEBRATES
AB Salinization is of major global concern due to its effect on stream biota, and ecosystem functions and services. In small streams, litter decomposition is a key ecosystem-level process driven by decomposers, mainly fungi (aquatic hyphomycetes), which link litter and invertebrates. Here we assessed the effects of an environmentally relevant range of salt additions (0, 2, 4, 8,16 g L-1 NaCl) on (1) fungal growth and species-specific reproductive output and (2) fungal mediated-decomposition of Quercus robur leaves. Growth rates of eight out of nine species of aquatic hyphomycetes were negatively affected by salinity at concentrations >= 4 g L-1. EC5Os were species-specific and >= 7.80 g L-1. Distinct thresholds were observed for reproduction: only five species sporulated at 2 g L-1, and a single one (Flagellospora curta) sporulated at 4 and 8 g L-1 NaCl. Based on these results, we evaluated if tolerant fungal assemblages, with increasingly fewer species (9, 5, 1), were able to maintain similar functional functions and processes at the different salt levels. No significant differences were found in oak mass loss or sporulation rates at 0 or 2 g L-1 NaCl; a clear inhibition of both parameters was observed at the highest concentrations (i.e., 4 and 8 g L-1 NaCl). Different dominance patterns in multi-species fungal assemblages may determine bottom-up impacts on the stream food webs through effects on detritivore feeding preferences. Specific growth rate, characterized by RNA concentration, was higher in the single species, at the highest salt-concentration, and lower in the 9-species assemblage. Respiration was almost 2-times higher in mixed assemblages without added salt. Under salt-contamination, trade-offs between growth and sporulation seem to guarantee high levels of fungal growth and decomposition, particularly in multi-species assemblages. In the presence of salt contamination, aquatic hyphomycetes, even at reduced diversity, remain important drivers of leaf decomposition and ensure organic matter recycling. (C) 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
RI Scientific output, CIIMAR/E-5122-2012
OI Scientific output, CIIMAR/0000-0001-6270-2153; Canhoto,
   Cristina/0000-0003-3343-8757; Goncalves, Ana Lucia/0000-0003-3693-9792;
   Guilhermino, Lucia/0000-0002-1009-8967; Simoes, Sara/0000-0002-8808-9489
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 0048-9697
EI 1879-1026
PD DEC 1
PY 2017
VL 599
BP 1638
EP 1645
DI 10.1016/j.sdtotenv2017.05.101
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000405253500059
PM 28535592
ER

PT J
AU Doledec, S
   Tilbian, J
   Bonada, N
AF Doledec, Sylvain
   Tilbian, Jessica
   Bonada, Nuria
TI Temporal variability in taxonomic and trait compositions of invertebrate
   assemblages in two climatic regions with contrasting flow regimes
SO SCIENCE OF THE TOTAL ENVIRONMENT
DT Article
DE Benthic invertebrates; Trait combinations; Foucard method; Mediterranean
   streams; Flow intermittence
ID STREAM MACROINVERTEBRATE COMMUNITIES; BENTHIC-MACROINVERTEBRATES;
   INTERANNUAL VARIABILITY; MEDITERRANEAN STREAMS; FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY;
   INTERMITTENT RIVERS; BIOLOGICAL TRAITS; PATTERNS; DROUGHT; CONNECTIVITY
AB Context: Understanding natural temporal changes in Mediterranean rivers with contrasting flow regimes in relation to those of temperate rivers may prove helpful in predicting effects of climate change on aquatic biodiversity.
   Goal: We aimed to compare temporal variability in taxonomic and trait compositions of nearly natural rivers in two climatic regions with varying flow regimes to address the effects of future climate changes on aquatic biodiversity in reference conditions.
   Methods: We analysed taxonomic and biological trait compositions using the Foucard multivariate method to compare within-site temporal variability levels and the evolution of within-date spatial variability patterns. In addition, we assessed the effects of temporal variability levels on taxonomic and functional diversity and on community specialization.
   Results: Our results reveal (i) highly fluctuating environments of the Mediterranean region, particularly in intermittent rivers, which lead to higher levels of temporal variability in both taxonomic and trait compositions of benthic invertebrate assemblages, with marked synchrony in Mediterranean streams linked to contrasting flow characteristics; (ii) higher degrees of taxonomic richness associated with higher levels of functional diversity in Mediterranean rivers relative to temperate rivers, (iii) higher temporal stability for functional diversity and trait compositions of benthic invertebrate assemblages than for taxonomic richness and compositions; and (iv) a recovery of all diversity metrics following drying events in intermittent sites.
   Conclusion: This study offers insight into a rarely addressed question concerning the temporal variability of trait compositions in benthic invertebrate assemblages among rivers differing in terms of flow regimes. It suggests that temperate rivers will experience higher levels of temporal variability in terms of taxonomic and trait compositions under future climatic change scenarios, even in sites that will remain perennial, resulting in higher levels of taxonomic and functional diversity. This lack of temporal stability in least-disturbed situations should be taken into account when developing bioassessment tools based on reference conditions. (C) 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
TC 5
Z9 5
SN 0048-9697
EI 1879-1026
PD DEC 1
PY 2017
VL 599
BP 1912
EP 1921
DI 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.05.057
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000405253500085
PM 28545218
ER

PT J
AU Mathers, KL
   Rice, SP
   Wood, PJ
AF Mathers, Kate L.
   Rice, Stephen P.
   Wood, Paul J.
TI Temporal effects of enhanced fine sediment loading on macroinvertebrate
   community structure and functional traits
SO SCIENCE OF THE TOTAL ENVIRONMENT
DT Article
DE Colmation; Sedimentation; Sediment clogging; Community composition;
   Life-history traits; Colonisation
ID BENTHIC INVERTEBRATE COMMUNITIES; DEPOSITED SEDIMENT; AGRICULTURAL
   STREAMS; LONG-TERM; MULTIPLE STRESSORS; NONNATIVE CRAYFISH; INSECT
   COMMUNITIES; LOWLAND STREAM; HYPORHEIC ZONE; IMPACTS
AB Deposition of fine sediment that fills interstitial spaces in streambed substrates is widely acknowledged to have significant negative effects on macroinvertebrate communities, but the temporal consistency of clogging effects is less well known. In this study the effects of experimentally enhanced fine sediment content on aquatic invertebrates were examined over 126 days in two lowland UK streams. Taxonomic approaches indicated significant differences in macroinvertebrate community structure associated with sediment treatment (clean or sedimented substrates), although the effects were variable on some occasions. The degree-of separation between clean and sedimented communities was strong within seven of the nine sampling periods with significant differences in community composition being evident. EPT taxa and taxon characterised as sensitive to fine sediment demonstrated strong responses to enhanced fine sediment loading. Faunal traits also detected the effects of enhanced fine sediment loading but the results were not as consistent or marked; More widely, the study highlights the temporal dynamics of sedimentation effects upon macroinvertebrate communities and the need to consider faunal life histories when examining the effects of fine sediment loading pressures on lotic ecosystems. (C) 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
RI User, Test/G-7821-2015
OI Rice, Stephen/0000-0003-0737-9845; Mathers, Kate/0000-0003-3741-1439
TC 10
Z9 10
SN 0048-9697
EI 1879-1026
PD DEC 1
PY 2017
VL 599
BP 513
EP 522
DI 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.04.096
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000405252000055
PM 28482308
ER

PT J
AU Frainer, A
   Primicerio, R
   Kortsch, S
   Aune, M
   Dolgov, AV
   Fossheim, M
   Aschan, MM
AF Frainer, Andre
   Primicerio, Raul
   Kortsch, Susanne
   Aune, Magnus
   Dolgov, Andrey V.
   Fossheim, Maria
   Aschan, Michaela M.
TI Climate-driven changes in functional biogeography of Arctic marine fish
   communities
SO PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES OF THE UNITED STATES OF
   AMERICA
DT Article
DE Barents Sea; climate warming; marine ecosystems; trait-based ecology;
   functional traits
ID COD BOREOGADUS-SAIDA; BARENTS SEA; SPECIES TRAITS; CONTINENTAL-SHELF;
   ICE COVER; DIVERSITY; TEMPERATURE; ECOSYSTEMS; OCEAN; LIFE
AB Climate change triggers poleward shifts in species distribution leading to changes in biogeography. In the marine environment, fish respond quickly to warming, causing community-wide reorganizations, which result in profound changes in ecosystem functioning. Functional biogeography provides a framework to address how ecosystem functioning may be affected by climate change over large spatial scales. However, there are few studies on functional biogeography in the marine environment, and none in the Arctic, where climate-driven changes are most rapid and extensive. We investigated the impact of climate warming on the functional biogeography of the Barents Sea, which is characterized by a sharp zoogeographic divide separating boreal from Arctic species. Our unique dataset covered 52 fish species, 15 functional traits, and 3,660 stations sampled during the recent warming period. We found that the functional traits characterizing Arctic fish communities, mainly composed of small-sized bottom-dwelling benthivores, are being rapidly replaced by traits of incoming boreal species, particularly the larger, longer lived, and more piscivorous species. The changes in functional traits detected in the Arctic can be predicted based on the characteristics of species expected to undergo quick poleward shifts in response to warming. These are the large, generalist, motile species, such as cod and haddock. We show how functional biogeography can provide important insights into the relationship between species composition, diversity, ecosystem functioning, and environmental drivers. This represents invaluable knowledge in a period when communities and ecosystems experience rapid climate-driven changes across biogeographical regions.
RI Frainer, Andre/G-4545-2014
OI Frainer, Andre/0000-0002-3703-7152
TC 14
Z9 14
SN 0027-8424
PD NOV 14
PY 2017
VL 114
IS 46
BP 12202
EP 12207
DI 10.1073/pnas.1706080114
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000415173300056
PM 29087943
ER

PT J
AU Manjarrez, J
   Pacheco-Tinoco, M
   Venegas-Barrera, CS
AF Manjarrez, Javier
   Pacheco-Tinoco, Martha
   Venegas-Barrera, Crystian S.
TI Intraspecific variation in the diet of the Mexican garter snake
   Thamnophis eques
SO PEERJ
DT Article
DE Ontogenetic; Size; Sexual variation; Thamnophis
ID SEXUAL SIZE DIMORPHISM; FOOD-HABITS; ELEGANS; POPULATIONS; ECOLOGY;
   FISH; PREY
AB The Mexican Garter Snake (Thamnophis eques) is a terrestrial-aquatic generalist that feeds on both aquatic and terrestrial prey. We describe size-related variation and sexual variation in the diet of T. eques through analysis of 262 samples of identifiable stomach contents in snakes from 23 locations on the Mexican Plateau. The snake T. eques we studied consumed mostly fish, followed in lesser amounts by leeches, earthworms, frogs, and tadpoles. Correspondence analysis suggested that the frequency of consumption of various prey items differed between the categories of age but not between sex of snakes, and the general pattern was a reduction of prey item diversity with size of snake. Snake length was correlated positively with mass of ingested prey. Large snakes consumed large prey and continued to consume smaller prey. In general, no differences were found between the prey taxa of male and female snakes, although males ate two times more tadpoles than females. Males and females did not differ in the mass of leeches, earthworms, fishes, frogs and tadpoles that they ate, and males and females that ate each prey taxon were similar in length. We discuss proximate and functional determinants of diet and suggest that the observed intraspecific variation in T. eques could be explored by temporal variation in prey availability, proportions of snake size classes and possible sexual dimorphism in head traits and prey dimensions to assess the role of intersexual resource competition.
OI Venegas-Barrera, Crystian Sadiel/0000-0002-4290-0838
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 2167-8359
PD NOV 14
PY 2017
VL 5
AR e4036
DI 10.7717/peerj.4036
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000415069500004
PM 29158976
ER

PT J
AU Helenius, LK
   Leskinen, E
   Lehtonen, H
   Nurminen, L
AF Helenius, Laura K.
   Leskinen, Elina
   Lehtonen, Hannu
   Nurminen, Leena
TI Spatial patterns of littoral zooplankton assemblages along a salinity
   gradient in a brackish sea: A functional diversity perspective
SO ESTUARINE COASTAL AND SHELF SCIENCE
DT Article; Proceedings Paper
CT 55th Conference of Estuarine-Coastal-Sciences-Association (ECSA)
CY SEP 06-09, 2015
CL London, ENGLAND
DE Baltic Sea; Functional diversity; Littoral zone; Salinity gradient;
   Biodiversity; Zooplankton
ID NORTHERN BALTIC SEA; PLANKTONIC FOOD-WEB; CRUSTACEAN ZOOPLANKTON;
   COMMUNITY COMPOSITION; FISH ASSEMBLAGES; INTERANNUAL VARIABILITY;
   SPECIES-DIVERSITY; BIODIVERSITY LOSS; COASTAL WATERS; GRAZING IMPACT
AB The distribution patterns and diversity of littoral zooplankton are both key baseline information for understanding the functioning of coastal ecosystems, and for identifying the mechanisms by which the impacts of recently increased eutrophication are transferred through littoral food webs. In this study, zooplankton community structure and diversity along a shallow coastal area of the northern Baltic Sea were determined in terms of horizontal environmental gradients. Spatial heterogeneity of the zooplankton community was examined along the gradient. Altogether 31 sites in shallow sandy bays on the coast of southwest Finland were sampled in the summer periods of 2009 and 2010 for zooplankton and environmental variables (surface water temperature, salinity, turbidity, wave exposure, macrophyte coverage, chlorophyll a and nutrients). Zooplankton diversity was measured as both taxonomic as well as functional diversity, using trait-based classification of planktonic crustaceans. Salinity, and to a lesser extent turbidity and temperature, were found to be the main predictors of the spatial patterns and functional diversity of the zooplanlcton community. Occurrence of cyclopoid copepods, as well as abundances of the calanoid copepod genus Acartia and the rotifer genus Keratella were found to be key factors in differentiating sites along the gradient. As far as we know, this is the first extensive study of functional diversity in Baltic Sea coastal zooplanlcton communities. (C) 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0272-7714
EI 1096-0015
PD NOV 5
PY 2017
VL 198
SI SI
BP 400
EP 412
DI 10.1016/j.ecss.2016.08.031
PN B
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000416187500009
ER

PT J
AU Silva, CAB
   Merigot, B
   Lucena-Fredou, F
   Ferreira, BP
   Coxey, MS
   Rezende, SM
   Fredou, T
AF Silva Junior, C. A. B.
   Merigot, B.
   Lucena-Fredou, F.
   Ferreira, B. P.
   Coxey, M. S.
   Rezende, S. M.
   Fredou, T.
TI Functional diversity of fish in tropical estuaries: A traits-based
   approach of communities in Pernambuco, Brazil
SO ESTUARINE COASTAL AND SHELF SCIENCE
DT Article; Proceedings Paper
CT 55th Conference of Estuarine-Coastal-Sciences-Association (ECSA)
CY SEP 06-09, 2015
CL London, ENGLAND
DE Monitoring; Diversity indices; Double principal coordinate analysis;
   Estuarine ecosystems; Species function
ID QUADRATIC ENTROPY; MARINE ECOSYSTEMS; SPECIES RICHNESS; ASSEMBLAGES;
   PATTERNS; EVOLUTIONARY; BIODIVERSITY; ORGANIZATION; REDUNDANCY; SERVICES
AB Environmental changes and human activities may have strong impacts on biodiversity and ecosystem functioning. While biodiversity is traditionally based on species richness and composition, there is a growing concern to take into account functional diversity to assess and manage species communities. In spite of their economic importance, functional diversity quantified by a traits-based approach is still poorly documented in tropical estuaries. In this study, the functional diversity of fishes was investigated within four estuaries in Pernambuco state, northeast of Brazil. These areas are subject to different levels of human impact (e.g. mangrove deforestation, shrimp farming, fishing etc.) and environmental conditions. Fishes were collected during 34 scientific surveys. A total of 122 species were identified and 12 functional traits were quantified describing two main functions: food acquisition and locomotion. Fish abundance and functional dissimilarities data were combined into a multivariate analysis, the Double Principal Coordinate Analysis, to identify the functional typology of fish assemblages according to the estuary. Results showed that Itapissuma, the largest estuary with a wider mangrove forest area, differs from the other three estuaries, showing higher mean values per samples of species richness S and quadratic entropy Q. Similarly, it presented a different functional typology (the first two axes of the DPCoA account for 68.7% of total inertia, while those of a traditional PCA based solely on species abundances provided only 17.4%). Conversely, Suape, Sirinhaem, and to a lower extent Rio Formoso, showed more similarity in their diversity. This result was attributed to their predominantly marine influenced hydrological features, and similar levels of species abundances and in morphological traits. Overall, this study, combining diversity indices and a recent multivariate analysis to access species contribution to functional typology, allows to deepen diversity assessment by providing additional information regarding the functional pattern of fish assemblages. (C) 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
RI Lucena Fredou, Flavia/I-3639-2012; Merigot, Bastien/H-7754-2018;
   Ferreira, Beatrice/A-5786-2013; Fredou, Thierry/A-6635-2011
OI Lucena Fredou, Flavia/0000-0001-5492-7205; Merigot,
   Bastien/0000-0001-5264-4324; Fredou, Thierry/0000-0002-0510-6424
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 0272-7714
EI 1096-0015
PD NOV 5
PY 2017
VL 198
SI SI
BP 413
EP 420
DI 10.1016/j.ecss.2016.08.030
PN B
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000416187500010
ER

PT J
AU Rosati, I
   Bergami, C
   Stanca, E
   Roselli, L
   Tagliolato, P
   Oggioni, A
   Fiore, N
   Pugnetti, A
   Zingone, A
   Boggero, A
   Basset, A
AF Rosati, Ilaria
   Bergami, Caterina
   Stanca, Elena
   Roselli, Leonilde
   Tagliolato, Paolo
   Oggioni, Alessandro
   Fiore, Nicola
   Pugnetti, Alessandra
   Zingone, Adriana
   Boggero, Angela
   Basset, Alberto
TI A thesaurus for phytoplankton trait-based approaches: Development and
   applicability
SO ECOLOGICAL INFORMATICS
DT Article
DE Functional diversity; Phytoplankton trait; Thesaurus; SKOS; Sematic
   interoperability
ID COMMUNITY ECOLOGY; FUNCTIONAL TRAITS; MARINE PLANKTON; SIZE;
   BIOGEOGRAPHY; INDEX; WEB; INFRASTRUCTURE; BIODIVERSITY; ONTOLOGIES
AB In the last few decades, functional trait-based approaches have undergone an extraordinary expansion in phytoplankton ecology, due to the relative simplicity and the well-defined traits that determine the ecological niche of these organisms. A large quantity of heterogeneous and distributed data has been produced on phytoplankton traits and their use could be made more effective and efficient if data harmonization and interoperability would be improved.
   The use of controlled vocabularies and thesauri is an acknowledged good practice to establish the foundation for semantic interoperability, a critical requirement for reuse and sharing of data. In fact, thesauri, collectively constructed, bypass ambiguity issues in natural language, facilitating the identification and integration of the information available in multiple data sources and allowing both scientists and computer applications to interpret more effectively the meaning of data.
   Here we present a semantic resource on phytoplankton functional traits: the PhytoTraits thesaurus (http://thesauri.lifewatchitaly.eu/PhytoTraits/index.php). PhytoTraits is the result of the interdisciplinary collaboration of experts both from the phytoplankton functional domain and from information and communication technologies, working together within LifeWatch Italy, the Italian node of the e-science European infrastructure for biodiversity and ecosystem research. PhytoTraits is the first initiative to deal with the semantics of phytoplankton functional traits, focusing on morpho-functional traits towards standardized bio-volume assessment. It reflects the agreement of a scientific expert community to fix semantic properties (e.g. label, definition) of approximately 120 traits.
   Following semantic web standard technologies, the thesaurus was implemented in Simple Knowledge Organization System (SKOS), a common data model based on the Resource Description Framework (RDF). PhytoTraits is freely available online, it can be queried through a SPARQL endpoint (http://thesauri.lifewatchitaly.eu/PhytoTraits/sparql.php) and is also accessible via API (http://thesauri.lifewatchitaly.eu/PhytoTraits/services.php) for integration with other systems. If adopted as a standard and rigorously applied and enriched by the scientific community, PhytoTraits, providing harmonized concepts with associated unique and resolvable URIs, has the potential to significantly reduce the barriers to data discovery, integration, and exchange.
RI tagliolato, paolo/P-9577-2018; Zingone, Adriana/E-4518-2010
OI tagliolato, paolo/0000-0002-0261-313X; Zingone,
   Adriana/0000-0001-5946-6532; , Ilaria/0000-0003-3422-7230; Bergami,
   Caterina/0000-0002-5284-1317; PUGNETTI, ALESSANDRA/0000-0002-7346-6675;
   Boggero, Angela/0000-0002-7534-3126; Oggioni,
   Alessandro/0000-0002-7997-219X
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 1574-9541
EI 1878-0512
PD NOV
PY 2017
VL 42
BP 129
EP 138
DI 10.1016/j.ecoinf.2017.10.014
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000418985600015
ER

PT J
AU Chase, AB
   Karaoz, U
   Brodie, EL
   Gomez-Lunar, Z
   Martiny, AC
   Martiny, JBH
AF Chase, Alexander B.
   Karaoz, Ulas
   Brodie, Eoin L.
   Gomez-Lunar, Zulema
   Martiny, Adam C.
   Martiny, Jennifer B. H.
TI Microdiversity of an Abundant Terrestrial Bacterium Encompasses
   Extensive Variation in Ecologically Relevant Traits
SO MBIO
DT Article
DE Actinobacteria; Curtobacterium; Microbacteriaceae; drought; ecotypes;
   glycoside hydrolases; nitrogen addition
ID PROCHLOROCOCCUS ECOTYPES; LITTER DECOMPOSITION; PROTEIN FAMILIES;
   GENE-SEQUENCES; BIOGEOGRAPHY; DATABASE; PATTERNS; RESOURCE; TAXONOMY;
   BACTERIOPLANKTON
AB Much genetic diversity within a bacterial community is likely obscured by microdiversity within operational taxonomic units (OTUs) defined by 16S rRNA gene sequences. However, it is unclear how variation within this microdiversity influences ecologically relevant traits. Here, we employ a multifaceted approach to investigate microdiversity within the dominant leaf litter bacterium, Curtobacterium, which comprises 7.8% of the bacterial community at a grassland site undergoing global change manipulations. We use cultured bacterial isolates to interpret metagenomic data, collected in situ over 2 years, together with lab-based physiological assays to determine the extent of trait variation within this abundant OTU. The response of Curtobacterium to seasonal variability and the global change manipulations, specifically an increase in relative abundance under decreased water availability, appeared to be conserved across six Curtobacterium lineages identified at this site. Genomic and physiological analyses in the lab revealed that degradation of abundant polymeric carbohydrates within leaf litter, cellulose and xylan, is nearly universal across the genus, which may contribute to its high abundance in grassland leaf litter. However, the degree of carbohydrate utilization and temperature preference for this degradation varied greatly among clades. Overall, we find that traits within Curtobacterium are conserved at different phylogenetic depths. We speculate that similar to bacteria in marine systems, diverse microbes within this taxon may be structured in distinct ecotypes that are key to understanding Curtobacterium abundance and distribution in the environment.
   IMPORTANCE Despite the plummeting costs of sequencing, characterizing the fine-scale genetic diversity of a microbial community-and interpreting its functional importance-remains a challenge. Indeed, most studies, particularly studies of soil, assess community composition at a broad genetic level by classifying diversity into taxa (OTUs) defined by 16S rRNA sequence similarity. However, these classifications potentially obscure variation in traits that result in fine-scale ecological differentiation among closely related strains. Here, we investigated "microdiversity" in a highly diverse and poorly characterized soil system (leaf litter in a southern Californian grassland). We focused on the most abundant bacterium, Curtobacterium, which by standard methods is grouped into only one OTU. We find that the degree of carbohydrate usage and temperature preference vary within the OTU, whereas its responses to changes in precipitation are relatively uniform. These results suggest that microdiversity may be key to understanding how soil bacterial diversity is linked to ecosystem functioning.
RI Brodie, Eoin/A-7853-2008; Karaoz, Ulas/J-7093-2014
OI Brodie, Eoin/0000-0002-8453-8435; 
TC 6
Z9 6
SN 2150-7511
PD NOV-DEC
PY 2017
VL 8
IS 6
AR e01809-17
DI 10.1128/mBio.01809-17
SC Microbiology
UT WOS:000418889500046
PM 29138307
ER

PT J
AU Foveau, A
   Dauvin, JC
AF Foveau, Aurelie
   Dauvin, Jean-Claude
TI Surprisingly diversified macrofauna in mobile gravels and pebbles from
   high-energy hydrodynamic environment of the 'Raz Blanchard' (English
   Channel)
SO REGIONAL STUDIES IN MARINE SCIENCE
DT Article
DE Amphipods; Polychaetes; Taxonomic richness; Hard bottom; High-energy
   environments
ID MARINE BENTHIC ECOSYSTEMS; VENUS-FASCIATA COMMUNITY; MAPPING SEABED
   BIOTOPES; TRAITS ANALYSIS BTA; BIOLOGICAL TRAITS; SIDESCAN SONAR;
   FUNCTIONAL STRUCTURE; FRANCE; BIODIVERSITY; ASSEMBLAGES
AB Our study concerns the sampling of patches of mobile gravel and pebbles at 14 stations (25 to 66 mwater depth) in an area of hard bottom located in the ` Raz Blanchard' (between Cap de La Hague in France and Alderney in the Channel Islands, UK). The samples collected from these benthic habitats with scattered fauna were sieved on 1 mm mesh and subjected to meticulous sorting, revealing the presence of a highly diversified mobile fauna. The epifauna and vagile macrofauna (> 1 mm) account for 140 taxa (120 species, 17 genera and three other levels of identification). Amphipods and polychaetes dominate the taxonomic richness, while crustaceans represent 75% of the fauna. Among these taxa, two species are new for the English Channel marine fauna. Biological Traits Analysis (BTA) indicates that the species show adaptation to such strong hydrodynamic conditions, owing to their small size which allows them to live in interstitial environments and on biological substrates, and which can locally modify the hydrodynamic conditions. (C) 2017 Elsevier B. V. All rights reserved.
OI Foveau, Aurelie/0000-0001-6283-2214
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 2352-4855
PD NOV
PY 2017
VL 16
BP 188
EP 197
DI 10.1016/j.rsma.2017.08.011
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000417779200021
ER

PT J
AU Luiza-Andrade, A
   Brasil, LS
   Benone, NL
   Shimano, Y
   Farias, APJ
   Montag, LF
   Doledec, S
   Juen, L
AF Luiza-Andrade, Ana
   Brasil, Leandro Schlemmer
   Benone, Naraiana Loureiro
   Shimano, Yulie
   Justino Farias, Ana Paula
   Montag, Luciano Fogaca
   Doledec, Sylvain
   Juen, Leandro
TI Influence of oil palm monoculture on the taxonomic and functional
   composition of aquatic insect communities in eastern. Brazilian Amazonia
SO ECOLOGICAL INDICATORS
DT Article
DE Land use; Freshwater; Ephemeroptera; Plecoptera; Trichoptera; Functional
   traits
ID DIVERSITY; STREAMS; FOREST; PLANTATIONS; ASSEMBLAGES; ANT; BIODIVERSITY;
   4TH-CORNER; VARIABLES; RESPONSES
AB Large scale palm oil plantations for the production of vegetable oil are among the most harmful agricultural activities to biodiversity, especially given 'their rapid expansion, worldwide. Many cases of species loss have already been recorded in Asian countries, although research is still incipient in the Amazon basin, and the environmental impacts of these monocultures on freshwater ecosystems in the Neotropical region are still poorly understood. The present study evaluated the effects of oil palm plantations on the physical structure of stream habitats and the resulting changes in the taxonomic and functional composition of aquatic insect communities. A total of 2100 specimens of the orders Ephemeroptera, Plecoptera and Trichoptera were collected during the present study, representing 40 genera and 16 families. The hypothesis tested was that the taxonomic and functional diversity of the orders Ephemeroptera, Plecoptera and Trichoptera (Insecta) decreases in streams surrounded by oil palm plantations in comparison with those embedded in forested areas. In the plantation streams, the taxonomic richness and composition, and the functional richness are modified significantly. Functional composition appeared unaltered despite reduced canopy cover associated with oil palm streams. These effects emphasize the importance of the riparian vegetation for the protection of the aquatic communities found in oil palm plantations. The maintenance of the riparian vegetation may mitigate the impacts of plantations, contributing to the conservation of insect communities and associated biodiversity.
RI Benone, Naraiana/O-3370-2018
OI Montag, Luciano/0000-0001-9370-6747; Benone,
   Naraiana/0000-0003-4155-9938; Luiza-Andrade, Ana/0000-0001-7748-067X
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 1470-160X
EI 1872-7034
PD NOV
PY 2017
VL 82
BP 478
EP 483
DI 10.1016/j.ecolind.2017.07.006
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000417551700046
ER

PT J
AU Heino, J
   Tolonen, KT
AF Heino, Jani
   Tolonen, Kimmo T.
TI Ecological drivers of multiple facets of beta diversity in a lentic
   macroinvertebrate metacommunity
SO LIMNOLOGY AND OCEANOGRAPHY
DT Article
ID BENTHIC COMMUNITY STRUCTURE; ENVIRONMENTAL VARIABLES; FUNCTIONAL
   DIVERSITY; LANDSCAPE POSITION; NORTHERN WISCONSIN; FISH COMMUNITIES;
   SPECIES TRAITS; DISTANCE DECAY; LAKES; ASSEMBLAGES
AB Community ecology has broadened considerably with the recognition that it is not only at the species-level data where biological patterns and their determinants should be studied. Rather, also functional and phylogenetic data should be examined, as they may provide important information for both basic ecology and applied fields such as conservation and bioassessment. We thus explored the distance decay of taxonomic, functional, and phylogenetic community compositions along spatial and environmental gradients within a boreal lake metacommunity. We used distance-based methods (i.e., Mantel test, Mantel correlograms and db-RDA) to examine different facets (i.e., taxonomic, functional, and phylogenetic) and components (i.e., total, turnover and nestedness-resultant) in relation to spatial and environmental variables. We found that the species compositions of lake benthic invertebrate communities varied mostly along environmental gradients, but were also weakly related to spatial distances between lakes. We also showed that functional and phylogenetic compositions were solely related to environmental variation across the lakes, but these relationships were generally weak. Our exploration of different facets and components of beta diversity added to the knowledge of lake invertebrate communities by adding functional and phylogenetic views, which has rarely been done in studies of aquatic metacommunities. Such information is also important in valuing lakes for conservation and bioassessment because it is not only at the species-level data where ecological patterns and underlying mechanisms should be explored.
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 0024-3590
EI 1939-5590
PD NOV
PY 2017
VL 62
IS 6
BP 2431
EP 2444
DI 10.1002/lno.10577
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000415930800007
ER

PT J
AU Smith, CR
   McCormick, PV
   Covich, AP
   Golladay, SW
AF Smith, C. R.
   McCormick, P. V.
   Covich, A. P.
   Golladay, S. W.
TI Comparison of macroinvertebrate assemblages across a gradient of flow
   permanence in an agricultural watershed
SO RIVER RESEARCH AND APPLICATIONS
DT Article
DE aquatic invertebrates; disturbance; flow regime; functional traits;
   groundwater; karst; stream intermittency
ID NON-PERENNIAL STREAMS; COMMUNITY STRUCTURE; HEADWATER STREAMS; TEMPORARY
   RIVERS; INVERTEBRATE COMMUNITIES; AQUATIC INVERTEBRATES; DROUGHT
   REFUGES; PRAIRIE STREAM; DESERT STREAM; LIFE-HISTORY
AB In the south-eastern United States and globally, increasing human water demand coupled with climate change is diminishing stream flows and increasing stream intermittency in many watersheds. We characterized benthic invertebrate assemblages across a stream flow gradient ranging from intermittent to perennial following a multiyear drought by examining the functional traits that can influence assemblage response to drying. We sampled 13 reaches within the Lower Flint River Basin in south-western Georgia, from September to December 2013. Reaches included perennial, near-perennial (ceased flowing but maintained a wetted channel during drought), intermittent-dry (seasonally dry), and intermittent-frequent (frequently dry). Distinct assemblages were documented across this gradient. Reaches that dried during the drought had a lower richness of aquatic insects, especially Ephemeroptera, Plecoptera, and Trichoptera taxa, partly due to inadequate time for life cycle completion and lack of adaptations to avoid drying. Intermittent reaches also included abundant and unique noninsect taxa such as Gammarus spp. and Isopoda. Projected trends towards increased water demand and drought severity and frequency in the south-eastern United States will magnify shifts towards dominance by drought-tolerant taxa as greater portions of stream networks become intermittent.
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 1535-1459
EI 1535-1467
PD NOV
PY 2017
VL 33
IS 9
BP 1428
EP 1438
DI 10.1002/rra.3211
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Water Resources
UT WOS:000414874400006
ER

PT J
AU Douglas, EJ
   Pilditch, CA
   Kraan, C
   Schipper, LA
   Lohrer, AM
   Thrush, SF
AF Douglas, Emily J.
   Pilditch, Conrad A.
   Kraan, Casper
   Schipper, Louis A.
   Lohrer, Andrew M.
   Thrush, Simon F.
TI Macrofaunal Functional Diversity Provides Resilience to Nutrient
   Enrichment in Coastal Sediments
SO ECOSYSTEMS
DT Article
DE denitrification; benthic community; nutrient processing; eutrophication;
   enzyme assay; intertidal; functional traits; sandflat
ID ECOSYSTEM FUNCTION; NITRATE REDUCTION; NITROGEN-CYCLE; DENITRIFICATION
   RATES; ESTUARINE SEDIMENTS; PERMEABLE SEDIMENTS; ORGANIC ENRICHMENT;
   BENTHIC MACROFAUNA; RESPONSE DIVERSITY; MARINE ECOSYSTEMS
AB The degradation of ecosystems is often associated with losses of large organisms and the concomitant losses of the ecological functions they mediate. Conversely, the resilience of ecosystems to stress is strongly influenced by faunal communities and their impacts on processes. Denitrification in coastal sediments is a process that may provide ecosystem resilience to eutrophication by removing excess bioavailable nitrogen. Here, we conducted a large-scale field experiment to test the effect of macrofaunal community composition on denitrification in response to two levels of nutrient enrichment at 28 sites across a biologically heterogeneous sandflat. After 7 weeks of enrichment, we measured denitrification enzyme activity (DEA) along with benthic macrofaunal community composition and environmental variables. We normalised treatment site specific DEA values by those in ambient sediments (DEA(CN)) to reveal the underlying response across the heterogeneous landscape. Nutrient enrichment caused reductions in DEA(CN) as well as functional changes in the community; these were both more pronounced under the highest level of nutrient loading (on average DEA(CN) was reduced by 34%). The degree of suppression of DEA(CN) following moderate nitrogen loading was mitigated by a key bioturbating species, but following high nitrogen loading (which reduced the key species density) the abundance and diversity of other nutrient processing species were the most important factors alleviating negative effects. This study provides a prime example of the context-dependent role of biodiversity in maintaining ecosystem functioning, underlining that different elements of biodiversity can become important as stress levels increase. Our results emphasise that management and conservation strategies require a real-world understanding of the community attributes that facilitate nutrient processing and maintain resilience in coastal ecosystems.
RI Schipper, Louis/F-1605-2010
OI Schipper, Louis/0000-0001-9899-1276; Kraan, Casper/0000-0003-2062-6222
TC 5
Z9 5
SN 1432-9840
EI 1435-0629
PD NOV
PY 2017
VL 20
IS 7
BP 1324
EP 1336
DI 10.1007/s10021-017-0113-4
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000414175600007
ER

PT J
AU McMurray, SE
   Pawlik, JR
   Finelli, CM
AF McMurray, Steven E.
   Pawlik, Joseph R.
   Finelli, Christopher M.
TI Demography alters carbon flux for a dominant benthic suspension feeder,
   the giant barrel sponge, on Conch Reef, Florida Keys
SO FUNCTIONAL ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE benthic pelagic coupling; benthic suspension feeding; demography;
   dissolved organic carbon; particulate organic carbon; Porifera
ID CARIBBEAN CORAL-REEFS; GREAT-BARRIER-REEF; POPULATION-DYNAMICS;
   XESTOSPONGIA-MUTA; COMMUNITIES; SEQUESTRATION; DEMOSPONGIAE;
   RECRUITMENT; PARROTFISH; EFFICIENCY
AB 1. A challenge to understanding ecosystem processes is that the functional roles of species are linked with the demography of populations. In many systems, and particularly on coral reefs, the dynamics and structure of populations of many functionally important species has significantly changed over recent decades due to a variety of disturbances, and the changes in the ecological processes mediated by them are poorly understood.
   2. Benthic suspension feeders are allogenic ecosystem engineers that contribute to the flow of materials and energy in aquatic systems. There is increasing evidence that sponges dominate this functional group on Caribbean reefs. Using demographic data from 2000 to 2012 and measurements of filtration rates of particulate and dissolved organic carbon, we parameterized a stage-based matrix model of population-mediated carbon flux for the Caribbean giant barrel sponge Xestospongia muta on Conch Reef, Florida Keys, to investigate the demographic mechanisms that mediate changes in benthic-pelagic coupling.
   3. Population-mediated carbon flux increased over time with increasing sponge density and volume, with the largest individuals making the greatest contribution. Elasticity analysis revealed that the growth of sponges in all stages, the survival of sponges in the two largest stages, and the production of new recruits by the largest sponges had the greatest influence on changes in population-mediated carbon flux. We estimate the mean carbon flux over 2000-2012 for X. muta at Conch Reef was 1575 mg C days(-1) m(-2), a value that exceeds that of any other single-species rate.
   4. Projections indicated that population-mediated carbon flux will continue to increase under present conditions; thus, X. muta is expected to play an even larger role in the transfer of carbon from the water column to the benthos on Caribbean coral reefs.
   5. Rather than being fixed, the functional role of species within a community are often dynamic and influenced by the demography of populations. The general framework developed here, a conversion of the basic unit of measurement for population models (i.e. the individual) into quantifiable metrics of species traits or activities, may be more broadly applied by further efforts to examine interrelationships between population and ecosystem processes.
OI McMurray, Steven/0000-0002-1187-5916
TC 8
Z9 8
SN 0269-8463
EI 1365-2435
PD NOV
PY 2017
VL 31
IS 11
BP 2188
EP 2198
DI 10.1111/1365-2435.12908
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000414248100017
ER

PT J
AU Mensens, C
   De Laender, F
   Janssen, CR
   Sabbe, K
   De Troch, M
AF Mensens, Christoph
   De Laender, Frederik
   Janssen, Colin R.
   Sabbe, Koen
   De Troch, Marleen
TI Different response-effect trait relationships underlie contrasting
   responses to two chemical stressors
SO JOURNAL OF ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE algae; aquatic plant ecology; diatom; ecosystem function; effect trait;
   herbicide; marine; metal; response trait; stress
ID FATTY-ACIDS; ECOSYSTEM FUNCTION; COPPER TOXICITY; BENTHIC DIATOMS;
   EXOPOLYSACCHARIDE PRODUCTION; MARINE-PHYTOPLANKTON; COMMUNITY ECOLOGY;
   PRIMARY PRODUCERS; BIODIVERSITY LOSS; FOOD-WEB
AB 1. Trait-based approaches evaluate ecosystem functioning under environmental change by relating traits predicting changes in species densities (response traits) to traits driving ecosystem functioning (effect traits). Stressors can, however, affect ecosystem functioning not only by altering species densities but also by directly changing species effect traits.
   2. We first identified the response traits predicting the cell density of 18 marine benthic diatom strains along gradients of two chemical stressors (a pesticide and a metal, atrazine and copper). We then tested if response traits could predict stressor-induced changes in ecosystem functioning, i.e. changes in the effect traits driving the diatoms' potential contribution to primary production, sediment stabilization and energy content in intertidal systems. Finally, we examined if changes in density and changes in ecosystem functioning were correlated, to assess whether species capable of growing under stressful conditions could maintain their contribution to ecosystem functioning.
   3. The relationship between response traits and stressor-induced changes in density and ecosystem functioning was different depending on stressor type: a set of intercorrelated morphological traits predicted changes in both density and ecosystem functioning under metal stress, with large cells being more stress resistant. Changes in density and changes in ecosystem functioning were positively related: diatoms whose density was least affected by the metal were also able to sustain functioning under metal exposure.
   4. In contrast, the capacity for mixotrophic growth predicted changes in density, but not changes in ecosystem functioning under pesticide stress. Pesticide effects on density and on ecosystem functioning were negatively related for energy content and sediment stabilization, indicating a limited capacity of pesticide-tolerant diatoms to maintain their contribution to ecosystem functioning.
   5. Synthesis. Ecosystem functioning under stress can depend on whether the response traits driving changes in species densities also predict direct stress effects on the species' contribution to functioning. Based on our results, we expect a disproportionate loss of functioning when traits driving species densities do not allow to maintain ecosystem functioning under stress.
RI De Laender, Frederik/D-2783-2014
OI De Laender, Frederik/0000-0002-4060-973X; De Troch,
   Marleen/0000-0002-6800-0299
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 0022-0477
EI 1365-2745
PD NOV
PY 2017
VL 105
IS 6
SI SI
BP 1598
EP 1609
DI 10.1111/1365-2745.12777
SC Plant Sciences; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000413341700014
ER

PT J
AU Tingle, JL
   Gartner, GEA
   Jayne, BC
   Garland, T
AF Tingle, J. L.
   Gartner, G. E. A.
   Jayne, B. C.
   Garland, T., Jr.
TI Ecological and phylogenetic variability in the spinalis muscle of snakes
SO JOURNAL OF EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE adaptation; comparative methods; constriction; ecomorphology; grade
   shifts; habitat; morphology; phylogeny; sidewinding; vertebrae
ID BODY-SIZE; MULTIMODEL INFERENCE; MUSCULAR MECHANISMS; BEHAVIORAL
   ECOLOGY; BOIGA-IRREGULARIS; NERODIA-FASCIATA; MODEL SELECTION;
   ELAPHE-OBSOLETA; SCALE COUNTS; EVOLUTION
AB Understanding the origin and maintenance of functionally important subordinate traits is a major goal of evolutionary physiologists and ecomorphologists. Within the confines of a limbless body plan, snakes are diverse in terms of body size and ecology, but we know little about the functional traits that underlie this diversity. We used a phylogenetically diverse group of 131 snake species to examine associations between habitat use, sidewinding locomotion and constriction behaviour with the number of body vertebrae spanned by a single segment of the spinalis muscle, with total numbers of body vertebrae used as a covariate in statistical analyses. We compared models with combinations of these predictors to determine which best fit the data among all species and for the advanced snakes only (N=114). We used both ordinary least-squares models and phylogenetic models in which the residuals were modelled as evolving by the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process. Snakes with greater numbers of vertebrae tended to have spinalis muscles that spanned more vertebrae. Habitat effects dominated models for analyses of all species and advanced snakes only, with the spinalis length spanning more vertebrae in arboreal species and fewer vertebrae in aquatic and burrowing species. Sidewinding specialists had shorter muscle lengths than nonspecialists. The relationship between prey constriction and spinalis length was less clear. Differences among clades were also strong when considering all species, but not for advanced snakes alone. Overall, these results suggest that muscle morphology may have played a key role in the adaptive radiation of snakes.
OI Tingle, Jessica/0000-0003-4336-6291
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 1010-061X
EI 1420-9101
PD NOV
PY 2017
VL 30
IS 11
BP 2031
EP 2043
DI 10.1111/jeb.13173
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Evolutionary Biology; Genetics &
   Heredity
UT WOS:000414617700008
PM 28857331
ER

PT J
AU Kokarev, VN
   Vedenin, AA
   Basin, AB
   Azovsky, AI
AF Kokarev, V. N.
   Vedenin, A. A.
   Basin, A. B.
   Azovsky, A. I.
TI Taxonomic and functional patterns of macrobenthic communities on a
   high-Arctic shelf: A case study from the Laptev Sea
SO JOURNAL OF SEA RESEARCH
DT Article
DE Laptev Sea; Macrozoobenthos; Biological Trait Analysis (BTA); Functional
   structure; Diversity; Redundancy
ID TRAITS ANALYSIS BTA; BIOLOGICAL TRAITS; BENTHIC ASSEMBLAGES; MARINE
   BIODIVERSITY; CURRENT KNOWLEDGE; EASTERN PART; BARENTS SEA; ECOSYSTEM;
   ECOLOGY; FAUNA
AB The studies of functional structure of high-Arctic Ecosystems are scarce. We used data on benthic macrofauna from 500-km latitudinal transect in the eastern Laptev Sea, from the Lena delta to the continental shelf break, to describe spatial patterns in species composition, taxonomic and functional structure in relation to environmental factors. Both taxonomy-based approach and Biological Trait analysis yielded similar results and showed general depth-related gradient in benthic diversity and composition. This congruence between taxonomical and functional dimensions of community organization suggests that the same environmental factors (primarily riverine input and regime of sedimentation) have similar effect on both community structure and functioning. BTA also revealed a distinct functional structure of stations situated at the Eastern Lena valley, with dominance of motile, burrowing sub-surface deposit-feeders and absence of sedentary tube-dwelling forms. The overall spatial distribution of benthic assemblages corresponds well to that described there in preceding decades, evidencing the long-term stability of bottom ecosystem. Strong linear relationship between species and traits diversity, however, indicates low functional redundancy, which potentially makes the ecosystem susceptible to a species loss or structural shifts.
RI Azovsky, Andrey/B-4773-2018
OI Azovsky, Andrey/0000-0001-6815-3968
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 1385-1101
EI 1873-1414
PD NOV
PY 2017
VL 129
BP 61
EP 69
DI 10.1016/j.seares.2017.08.011
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000413607500008
ER

PT J
AU Rivadeneira, MM
   Nielsen, SN
AF Rivadeneira, Marcelo M.
   Nielsen, Sven N.
TI Diversification dynamics, species sorting, and changes in the functional
   diversity of marine benthic gastropods during the Pliocene-Quaternary at
   temperate western South America
SO PLOS ONE
DT Article
ID PERMIAN MASS EXTINCTION; SEA-LEVEL CHANGES; CENTRAL CHILE; MOLLUSCAN
   ASSEMBLAGES; CURRENT KNOWLEDGE; NORTHERN CHILE; NEOGENE; PERU;
   MURICIDAE; PACIFIC
AB Functional diversity based on species traits is a powerful tool to investigate how changes in species richness and composition affect ecosystem functioning. However, studies aimed at understanding changes in functional diversity over large temporal and spatial scales are still scant. Here we evaluate the combined effect of diversification and species sorting on functional diversity of fossil marine gastropods during the Pliocene-Quaternary transition in the Pacific coast of South America. We analyzed a total of 172 species in 29 Pliocene and 97 Quaternary sites. Each species was characterized according to six functional traits: body size, feeding type, mobility, attachment, life-habit, and larval mode. Functional diversity was estimated according to four indexes (functional richness, evenness, divergence and dispersion) based on functional traits measured. Extrapolated species richness showed a slight yet not significant decrease from the Pliocene to the Quaternary despite the fact that a large faunal turnover took place; furthermore, a large extinction of Pliocene species (61-76%) was followed by a high pulse of appearances (49-56%) during the Quaternary. Three out of four indices of functional diversity (evenness, divergence and dispersion) increased significantly towards the Quaternary which is more than expected under a random turnover of species. The increase in functional diversity is associated with a loss of large-sized carnivore forms, which tended to be replaced by small-sized grazers. Hence, this trait-selective species turnover, even in the absence of significant changes in species richness, likely had a large effect and has shaped the functional diversity of present-day assemblages.
OI Nielsen, Sven/0000-0003-2064-8050
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 1932-6203
PD OCT 26
PY 2017
VL 12
IS 10
AR e0187140
DI 10.1371/journal.pone.0187140
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000413845400121
PM 29073224
ER

PT J
AU Bertocci, I
   Sousa-Pinto, I
   Duarte, P
AF Bertocci, Iacopo
   Sousa-Pinto, I.
   Duarte, P.
TI Spatial variation of reef fishes and the relative influence of biotic
   and abiotic habitat traits
SO HELGOLAND MARINE RESEARCH
DT Article
DE Biological trait; Distribution pattern; Fish assemblage; Northeastern
   Atlantic; Reef structure
ID MARINE PROTECTED AREAS; SPECIES ABUNDANCE DISTRIBUTIONS; SUBTIDAL
   SESSILE ASSEMBLAGES; NORTHEASTERN NEW-ZEALAND; COMMUNITY STRUCTURE;
   PORTUGUESE COAST; HOME-RANGE; DISTRIBUTION PATTERNS; LATITUDINAL
   GRADIENT; MEDITERRANEAN SEA
AB Patterns of distribution of reef fishes were examined across three spatial scales and related to habitat traits along 25 km of the northern Portuguese coast. Response variables included the multivariate assemblage structure, the total number of taxa and individuals, and the abundance of single groups categorized according to their preference for the benthic, proximo-benthic or pelagic environment, feeding and reproductive behaviour. Habitat traits included topographic elements (small and large 'drops' like cracks and crevices) and the extent of dominant morpho-functional types of macroalgae (kelp, large foliose, small erect, turf-forming filamentous, and encrusting). All fish responses were characterized by the largest variance at the smallest scale (among transects tens m apart), followed by that among reefs (hundreds m to 1 km apart) and almost null variance among sites (some km apart). Small and large 'drops' of the substratum explained, respectively, considerable variation of assemblage structure and the total abundance of individuals, while the extent of bare rock influenced the richness of taxa and that of benthic fishes, fishes feeding on sessile invertebrates and fishes laying benthic eggs or having nesting behaviour. Combinations of abiotic and biotic structural attributes of reefs influenced proximo-benthic fishes, the predators of mobile animals and fishes releasing pelagic eggs. The here reported associations between patterns of distribution of reef fishes and habitat traits have implications for the design of future protection schemes suitable to guarantee the conservation of reef fish communities and of the processes responsible for their variation. Within the SLOSS (single-large vs. several-small) debate in the design of marine reserves, for example, effective protection to the studied reef fishes would be provided by a set of small reserves, rather than a single large which might be appropriate for fishes having wider home ranges.
RI Shen, ChengHan/D-1972-2018; Duarte, Pedro/F-1247-2014
OI Duarte, Pedro/0000-0001-7461-605X; Bertocci, Iacopo/0000-0002-1519-1677
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1438-387X
EI 1438-3888
PD OCT 17
PY 2017
VL 71
AR 20
DI 10.1186/s10152-017-0500-4
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000413213100001
ER

PT J
AU Abrahams, MI
   Peres, CA
   Costa, HCM
AF Abrahams, Mark I.
   Peres, Carlos A.
   Costa, Hugo C. M.
TI Measuring local depletion of terrestrial game vertebrates by
   central-place hunters in rural Amazonia
SO PLOS ONE
DT Article
ID MANU NATIONAL-PARK; TROPICAL FORESTS; EMPTY FOREST; PRIMATE COMMUNITIES;
   INDIGENOUS PEOPLES; MBARACAYU RESERVE; TAYASSU-PECARI; BRINGING HOME;
   BIOKO ISLAND; CONSERVATION
AB The degree to which terrestrial vertebrate populations are depleted in tropical forests occupied by human communities has been the subject of an intense polarising debate that has important conservation implications. Conservation ecologists and practitioners are divided over the extent to which community-based subsistence offtake is compatible with ecologically functional populations of tropical forest game species. To quantify depletion envelopes of forest vertebrates around human communities, we deployed a total of 383 camera trap stations and 78 quantitative interviews to survey the peri-community areas controlled by 60 semi-subsistence communities over a combined area of over 3.2 million hectares in the Medio Jurua and Uatuma regions of Central-Western Brazilian Amazonia. Our results largely conform with prior evidence that hunting large-bodied vertebrates reduces wildlife populations near settlements, such that they are only found at a distance to settlements where they are hunted less frequently. Camera trap data suggest that a select few harvest-sensitive species, including lowland tapir, are either repelled or depleted by human communities. Nocturnal and cathemeral species were detected relatively more frequently in disturbed areas close to communities, but individual species did not necessarily shift their activity patterns. Group biomass of all species was depressed in the wider neighbourhood of urban areas rather than communities. Interview data suggest that species traits, especially group size and body mass, mediate these relationships. Large-bodied, large-group-living species are detected farther from communities as reported by experienced informants. Long-established communities in our study regions have not "emptied" the surrounding forest. Low human population density and low hunting offtake due to abundant sources of alternative aquatic protein, suggest that these communities represent a best-case scenario for sustainable hunting of wildlife for food, thereby providing a conservative assessment of game depletion. Given this 'best-case' camera trap and interview-based evidence for hunting depletion, regions with higher human population densities, external trade in wildlife and limited access to alternative protein will likely exhibit more severe depletion.
OI Peres, Carlos/0000-0002-1588-8765; abrahams, mark/0000-0002-6424-187X
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 1932-6203
PD OCT 17
PY 2017
VL 12
IS 10
AR e0186653
DI 10.1371/journal.pone.0186653
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000413167500068
PM 29040340
ER

PT J
AU van der Wal, D
   Lambert, GI
   Ysebaert, T
   Plancke, YMG
   Herman, PMJ
AF van der Wal, Daphne
   Lambert, Gwladys I.
   Ysebaert, Tom
   Plancke, Yves M. G.
   Herman, Peter M. J.
TI Hydrodynamic conditioning of diversity and functional traits in subtidal
   estuarine macrozoobenthic communities
SO ESTUARINE COASTAL AND SHELF SCIENCE
DT Article
DE Macrozoobenthos; Estuarine gradients; Functional traits; Hydrodynamics;
   Flow; Westerschelde
ID SCALE SPATIAL-PATTERNS; BENTHIC COMMUNITIES; COASTAL MANAGEMENT; WESTERN
   SCHELDT; FEEDING GUILD; WADDEN SEA; MACROFAUNA; GRADIENT; ECOSYSTEM;
   QUALITY
AB Variations in abundance and diversity of estuarine benthic macrofauna are typically described along the salinity gradient. The influence of gradients in water depth, hydrodynamic energy and sediment properties are less well known. We studied how these variables influence the distribution of subtidal macrofauna in the polyhaline zone of a temperate estuary (Westerschelde, SW Netherlands). Macrofauna density, biomass and species richness, combined in a so-called ecological richness, decreased with current velocities and median grain-size and increased with organic carbon of the sediment, in total explaining 39% of the variation. The macrofauna community composition was less well explained by the three environmental variables (approx. 12-15% in total, with current velocity explaining approx. 8%). Salinity, water depth and distance to the intertidal zone had a very limited effect on both ecological richness and the macrofauna community. The proportion of (surface) deposit feeders (including opportunistic species), decreased relative to that of omnivores and carnivores with increasing current velocity and sediment grain-size. In parallel, the proportion of burrowing sessile benthic species decreased relative to that of mobile benthic species that are able to swim. Correspondingly, spatial variations in hydrodynamics yielded distinct hotspots and coldspots in ecological richness. The findings highlight the importance of local hydrodynamic conditions for estuarine restoration and conservation. The study provides a tool based on a hydrodynamic model to assess and predict ecological richness in estuaries. (C) 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
RI Herman, Peter/A-9018-2011; van der Wal, Daphne/A-8875-2011
OI Herman, Peter/0000-0003-2188-6341; van der Wal,
   Daphne/0000-0002-2319-056X
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 0272-7714
EI 1096-0015
PD OCT 15
PY 2017
VL 197
BP 80
EP 92
DI 10.1016/j.ecss.2017.08.012
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000412252800008
ER

PT J
AU Vallina, SM
   Cermeno, P
   Dutkiewicz, S
   Loreau, M
   Montoya, JM
AF Vallina, S. M.
   Cermeno, P.
   Dutkiewicz, S.
   Loreau, M.
   Montoya, J. M.
TI Phytoplankton functional diversity increases ecosystem productivity and
   stability
SO ECOLOGICAL MODELLING
DT Article
DE Shannon entropy; Plankton foodwebs; Species-traits; Ecological
   selection; Ecosystem modelling
ID NATURAL PHYTOPLANKTON; MARINE-PHYTOPLANKTON; GRASSLAND EXPERIMENT; PLANT
   DIVERSITY; BIODIVERSITY; OCEAN; COMPETITION; BIOGEOGRAPHY; COMMUNITIES;
   COEXISTENCE
AB The effect of biodiversity on ecosystem functioning is one of the major questions of ecology. However, the role of phytoplankton functional diversity in ecosystem productivity and stability under fluctuating (i.e. non-equilibrium) environments remains largely unknown. Here we use a marine ecosystem model to study the effect of phytoplankton functional diversity on both ecosystem productivity and its stability for seasonally variable nutrient supply and temperature. Functional diversity ranges from low to high along these two environmental axes independently. Changes in diversity are obtained by varying the range of uptake strategies and thermal preferences of the species present in the community. Species can range from resource gleaners to opportunists, and from cold to warm thermal preferences. The phytoplankton communities self-assemble as a result of species selection by resource competition (nutrients) and environmental filtering (temperature). Both processes lead to species asynchrony but their effect on productivity and stability differ. We find that the diversity of temperature niches has a strong and direct positive effect on productivity and stability due to species complementarity, while the diversity of uptake strategies has a weak and indirect positive effect due to sampling probability. These results show that more functionally diverse phytoplankton communities lead to higher and more stable ecosystem productivity but the positive effect of biodiversity on ecosystem functioning depends critically on the type of environmental gradient. (C) 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
OI Montoya, Jose M./0000-0002-6676-7592; Cermeno, Pedro/0000-0002-3902-3475
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 0304-3800
EI 1872-7026
PD OCT 10
PY 2017
VL 361
BP 184
EP 196
DI 10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2017.06.020
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000411774000016
ER

PT J
AU Weisse, T
AF Weisse, Thomas
TI Functional diversity of aquatic ciliates
SO EUROPEAN JOURNAL OF PROTISTOLOGY
DT Article
DE Functional redundancy; Functional response; Functional trait; Ecological
   networks; Metagenomics; Numerical response
ID FRESH-WATER CILIATE; PELAGIC FOOD WEBS; PARTICLE-SIZE SELECTION;
   FREE-LIVING PROTOZOA; LOW BACTERIAL LEVELS; BODY-SIZE; COMMUNITY
   STRUCTURE; GROWTH-RATES; OXYRRHIS-MARINA; LAKE CONSTANCE
AB This paper first reviews the concept of functional diversity in general terms and then applies it to free-living aquatic ciliates. Ciliates are extremely versatile organisms and display an enormous functional diversity as key elements of pelagic food webs, acting as predators of bacteria, algae, other protists and even some metazoans. Planktonic ciliates are important food for zooplankton, and mixotrophic and functionally autotrophic species may significantly contribute to primary production in the ocean and in lakes. The co-occurrence of many ciliate species in seemingly homogenous environments indicates a wide range of their ecological niches. Variation in space and time may foster co-occurrence and prevent violating the competitive exclusion principle among ciliates using the same resources. Considering that many ciliates may be dormant and/or rare in many habitats, ciliate species diversity must be higher than can be deduced from simple sampling techniques; molecular methods of identification clearly point to this hidden diversity. From a functional point of view, the question is how much of this diversity represents redundancy. A key challenge for future research is to link the ecophysiological performance of naturally co-occurring ciliates to their functional genes. To this end, more experimental research is needed with with functionally different species. (C) 2017 The Author. Published by Elsevier GmbH.
OI Weisse, Thomas/0000-0001-6103-6558
TC 6
Z9 6
SN 0932-4739
EI 1618-0429
PD OCT
PY 2017
VL 61
SI SI
BP 331
EP 358
DI 10.1016/j.ejop.2017.04.001
PN B
SC Microbiology
UT WOS:000416535600004
ER

PT J
AU Gaspar, R
   Pereira, L
   Neto, JM
AF Gaspar, Rui
   Pereira, Leonel
   Neto, Joao M.
TI Intertidal zonation and latitudinal gradients on macroalgal assemblages:
   Species, functional groups and thallus morphology approaches
SO ECOLOGICAL INDICATORS
DT Article
DE Marine macroalgae; Spatial variability; Rocky shores; Assemblages
   structure; Functional groups; Traits; Intertidal zonation; Latitudinal
   patterns
ID SCALE SPATIAL VARIABILITY; TRAITS ANALYSIS BTA; TAXONOMIC RESOLUTION;
   ALGAL ASSEMBLAGES; MARINE MACROALGAE; ROCKY SHORES; PATTERNS;
   COMMUNITIES; BIODIVERSITY; ABUNDANCE
AB Macroalgae are unavoidable biological elements when monitoring and assessing costal environments. However, these tasks can be difficult to address because macroalgae a) present a high natural variability across a range of spatial and temporal scales, b) they imply a high sampling and laboratory processing effort and good taxonomical expertise (as they are a very diverse group of species), and c) there is insufficient knowledge about their structural and functional characteristics. This work addressed how the vertical (intertidal zonation) and horizontal (latitudinal gradient) variability of macroalgae assemblages are structured across continental Portugal, as well as how some surrogates for species-level biodiversity measures (namely functional groups and thallus morphology approaches) respond to such large-scale variability. Particularly, it was tested if intertidal zonation patterns are higher than fine-scale horizontal variation, and however, if vertical variation decreases along broad-scale horizontal variation. To do so, cover per species was taken (using a photographical and GIS methodological approach) from five sites located along the shoreline and along respective upper- mid- and lower-intertidal zones. The work findings include that both intertidal and latitudinal gradients impose deep structural changes on assemblages patterns. That is, broad-scale processes along Portuguese latitudes act as strongly as vertical stress gradients on assemblages patterns. Functional groups and thallus morphology approaches were useful to generalize the latitudinal assemblages patterns, where some groups emerge at the expense of others, and may improve biodiversity understanding and ecological synthesis. Because these surrogates decrease taxonomical expertise needs and can provide insight into the functional structure of macroalgal communities, their patterns founded may be particularly useful as reference data for further monitoring, so that shifts in such patterns might represent early warning surrogate approaches to detect environmental impact changes. Ultimately, to generate broader databases on rocky shore assemblages diversity (from species-level to functional groups and thallus morphologies approaches) can be useful for large-scale comparisons and for establishing ecological reference conditions, including for monitoring programs and environmental impact studies.
OI Gaspar, Rui/0000-0002-7829-1763; Pereira, Leonel/0000-0002-6819-0619;
   Neto, Joao/0000-0002-9033-3671
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1470-160X
EI 1872-7034
PD OCT
PY 2017
VL 81
BP 90
EP 103
DI 10.1016/j.ecolind.2017.05.060
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000417229100010
ER

PT J
AU Raz-Yaseef, N
   Young-Robertson, J
   Rahn, T
   Sloan, V
   Newman, B
   Wilson, C
   Wullschleger, SD
   Torn, MS
AF Raz-Yaseef, Naama
   Young-Robertson, Jessica
   Rahn, Thom
   Sloan, Victoria
   Newman, Brent
   Wilson, Cathy
   Wullschleger, Stan D.
   Torn, Margaret S.
TI Evapotranspiration across plant types and geomorphological units in
   polygonal Arctic tundra
SO JOURNAL OF HYDROLOGY
DT Article
DE Arctic tundra; Evapotranspiration; Greenhouse gases; Moss; Polygon
   structure
ID CLIMATE-CHANGE; PERMAFROST CARBON; FUNCTIONAL TYPES; NORTHERN ALASKA;
   VEGETATION; SYSTEM; FLUXES; WATER; ECOSYSTEM; EVAPORATION
AB Coastal tundra ecosystems are relatively flat, and yet display large spatial variability in ecosystem traits. The microtopographical differences in polygonal geomorphology produce heterogeneity in permafrost depth, soil temperature, soil moisture, soil geochemistry, and plant distribution. Few measurements have been made, however, of how water fluxes vary across polygonal tundra plant types, limiting our ability to understand and model these ecosystems. Our objective was to investigate how plant distribution and geomorphological location affect actual evapotranspiration (ET). These effects are especially critical in light of the rapid change polygonal tundra systems are experiencing with Arctic warming. At a field site near Barrow, Alaska, USA, we investigated the relationships between ET and plant cover in 2014 and 2015. ET was measured at a range of spatial and temporal scales using: (1) An eddy covariance flux tower for continuous landscape-scale monitoring; (2) An automated clear surface chamber over dry vegetation in a fixed location for continuous plot-scale monitoring; and (3) Manual measurements with a clear portable chamber in approximately 60 locations across the landscape. We found that variation in environmental conditions and plant community composition, driven by microtopographical features, has significant influence on ET. Among plant types, ET from moss-covered and inundated areas was more than twice that from other plant types. ET from troughs and low polygonal centers was significantly higher than from high polygonal centers. ET varied seasonally, with peak fluxes of 0.14 mm h(-1) in July. Despite 24 hours of daylight in summer, diurnal fluctuations in incoming solar radiation and plant processes produced a diurnal cycle in ET. Combining the patterns we observed with projections for the impact of permafrost degradation on polygonal structure suggests that microtopographic changes associated with permafrost thaw have the potential to alter tundra ecosystem ET. Published by Elsevier B.V.
RI Raz Yaseef, Naama/D-3385-2015; Torn, Margaret/D-2305-2015
OI Raz Yaseef, Naama/0000-0002-7405-1607; Torn,
   Margaret/0000-0002-8174-0099
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0022-1694
EI 1879-2707
PD OCT
PY 2017
VL 553
BP 816
EP 825
DI 10.1016/j.jhydrol.2017.08.036
SC Engineering; Geology; Water Resources
UT WOS:000412612700063
ER

PT J
AU Favre-Bac, L
   Mony, C
   Burel, F
   Seimandi-Corda, G
   Ernoult, A
AF Favre-Bac, Lisa
   Mony, Cendrine
   Burel, Francoise
   Seimandi-Corda, Gaetan
   Ernoult, Aude
TI Connectivity drives the functional diversity of plant dispersal traits
   in agricultural landscapes: the example of ditch metacommunities
SO LANDSCAPE ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE Aquatic systems; Dispersal filter; Habitat fragmentation; Hydrochory;
   Plant strategy; Seeds
ID LIFE-HISTORY TRAITS; SEED DISPERSAL; LIMITING SIMILARITY; COMMUNITY
   ECOLOGY; SPATIAL-PATTERNS; ASSEMBLY RULES; CLONAL PLANT; BIODIVERSITY;
   CONSEQUENCES; SELECTION
AB Context Studying communities using a trait-based approach has contributed to major advances in the understanding of community assembly mechanisms, but research has primarily focused on the effect of local biotic and abiotic processes on plant assemblages.
   Objectives At the landscape level, we expect that the diversity of trait values (i.e. functional diversity) in plant assemblages is not random because there might be strong environmental constraints occurring as a filter of plant species at this level. We expect that fragmentation, through connectivity loss, may reduce functional diversity by filtering plant dispersal traits within the global pool of species toward those that present the trait values that are the most adapted. We tested this hypothesis at the metacommunity level and focused on ditch plant dispersal traits.
   Methods We characterised the functional diversity of 27 ditch bank metacommunities for three seed traits encompassing the whole dispersal process: production, buoyancy and mass. We computed four connectivity variables based on the ditch networks surrounding each metacommunity. Null models were designed to quantify functional convergence (i.e. convergence of the trait values around a mean) or divergence for each trait (i.e. dissimilarity in plant trait values).
   Results At the metacommunity level, we demonstrate that (1) connectivity loss reduces the functional diversity of dispersal traits (seed production and seed buoyancy), leading to the convergence of trait values, whereas more connected landscapes promote randomness, or even divergence (seed mass) in trait values; (2) these changes are due to the modification in the number of occurrence of plant species over the nine local communities sampled, rather than in species identity.
   Conclusions Our results indicated that, at the metacommunity level, reduced connectivity acts as a filter on the dispersal traits of plant species, promoting the broad distribution of species with efficient dispersal abilities in such landscapes. Thus, functional diversity helps us to understand the mechanisms underlying the effects of fragmentation on biodiversity.
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 0921-2973
EI 1572-9761
PD OCT
PY 2017
VL 32
IS 10
BP 2029
EP 2040
DI 10.1007/s10980-017-0564-1
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Physical Geography; Geology
UT WOS:000412693200008
ER

PT J
AU Murray, F
   Solan, M
   Douglas, A
AF Murray, Fiona
   Solan, Martin
   Douglas, Alex
TI Effects of algal enrichment and salinity on sediment particle reworking
   activity and associated nutrient generation mediated by the intertidal
   polychaete Hediste diversicolor
SO JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL MARINE BIOLOGY AND ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE Ecosystem function; Bioturbation; Functional groups; Functional traits;
   Intraspecific variation; Hediste diversicolor
ID MARINE BENTHIC ECOSYSTEMS; TRAITS ANALYSIS BTA; NEREIS-DIVERSICOLOR;
   COMMUNITY STRUCTURE; IN-SITU; FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; OCEAN ACIDIFICATION;
   ESTUARINE SEDIMENTS; CLIMATE-CHANGE; YTHAN ESTUARY
AB The activities of marine benthic invertebrates link to many ecosystem properties and are often used as an alternative to the direct measurement of ecosystem functioning, such as nutrient cycling. However, links between bioturbation metrics and functional classifications of organisms based on bioturbation mode are rarely tested under a range of circumstances and are commonly assumed to be universally applicable. In this study we examine the effects of particle reworking by the polychaete Hediste diversicolor on the mediation of nutrient concentrations for a range of salinity and sediment algal enrichment levels. Sediment particle reworking increased in the presence of moderate algal enrichment but was reduced at higher levels of algal enrichment and was not affected by salinity. Nutrient concentrations in the water column, however, responded to the independent effects of salinity and algal enrichment. This study demonstrates that variation in particle reworking and mixing activity of H. diversicolor that relate to changes in environmental condition can be sufficient to alter species contributions to ecosystem functioning without altering the mechanistic basis of mediation. Our findings indicate that faunal processes that lead to changes in ecosystem functioning can be differentially expressed in a dynamic environment, and call for more careful consideration in the design and analysis of experiments that attempt to link the functional role of species to ecosystem properties.
OI Solan, Martin/0000-0001-9924-5574; Murray, Fiona/0000-0003-3312-0175
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 0022-0981
EI 1879-1697
PD OCT
PY 2017
VL 495
BP 75
EP 82
DI 10.1016/j.jembe.2017.06.002
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000411421100009
ER

PT J
AU Talaga, S
   Dezerald, O
   Carteron, A
   Leroy, C
   Carrias, JF
   Cereghino, R
   Dejean, A
AF Talaga, Stanislas
   Dezerald, Olivier
   Carteron, Alexis
   Leroy, Celine
   Carrias, Jean-Francois
   Cereghino, Regis
   Dejean, Alain
TI Urbanization impacts the taxonomic and functional structure of aquatic
   macroinvertebrate communities in a small Neotropical city
SO URBAN ECOSYSTEMS
DT Article
DE Aedes aegypti; Bioindicator; Diversity; Functional traits; Tank
   bromeliads; Urban ecology
ID AEDES-AEGYPTI; BROMELIAD ECOSYSTEMS; TANK-BROMELIADS; DIVERSITY;
   ECOLOGY; DIPTERA; BIODIVERSITY; MICROCOSMS; FRAMEWORK; RESPONSES
AB Due to habitat fragmentation, resource disruption and pollution, urbanization is one of the most destructive forms of anthropization affecting ecosystems worldwide. Generally, human-mediated perturbations dramatically alter species diversity in urban sites compared to the surroundings, thus influencing the functioning of the entire ecosystem. We investigated the taxonomic and functional diversity patterns of the aquatic macroinvertebrate communities in tank bromeliads by comparing those found in a small Neotropical city with those from an adjacent rural site. Changes in the quality of detrital inputs in relation to lower tree diversity and the presence of synanthropic species are likely important driving forces behind the observed structural changes in the urban site. Leaf-litter processors (i.e., shredders, scrapers) were positively affected in the urban site, while filter-feeders that process smaller particles produced by the activity of the shredders were negatively affected. Because we cannot ascertain whether the decline in filter-feeders is related to food web-mediated effects or to competitive exclusion (Aedes aegypti mosquitoes were present in urban bromeliads only), further studies are necessary to account for the effects of intra-guild competition or inter-guild facilitation.
RI Leroy, Celine/I-4857-2016
OI Leroy, Celine/0000-0003-4859-8040; Cereghino, Regis/0000-0003-3981-3159;
   Carrias, Jean-Francois/0000-0002-6201-1544
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 1083-8155
EI 1573-1642
PD OCT
PY 2017
VL 20
IS 5
BP 1001
EP 1009
DI 10.1007/s11252-017-0653-6
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Urban
   Studies
UT WOS:000411519400004
ER

PT J
AU Carbonell, JA
   Velasco, J
   Millan, A
   Green, AJ
   Coccia, C
   Guareschi, S
   Gutierrez-Canovas, C
AF Carbonell, jose Antonio
   Velasco, Josefa
   Millan, Andres
   Green, Andy J.
   Coccia, Cristina
   Guareschi, Simone
   Gutierrez-Canovas, Cayetano
TI Biological invasion modifies the co-occurrence patterns of insects along
   a stress gradient
SO FUNCTIONAL ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE alien species; coexistence; community assembly; Corixidae; habitat
   filtering; niche differentiation; predictive ecology
ID TRICHOCORIXA-VERTICALIS FIEBER; ANALYZING SPECIES COOCCURRENCE;
   FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; LIMITING SIMILARITY; PLANT-COMMUNITIES; CORIXIDAE;
   HEMIPTERA; IMPACTS; TRAITS; METAANALYSIS
AB Biological invasions have become one of the most important drivers of biodiversity loss and ecosystem change world-wide. However, it is still unclear how invasions may interact with local abiotic stressors, which are expected to increase as global change intensifies. Furthermore, we know little about the response to biological invasions of insects, despite their disproportionate contribution to global animal biodiversity.
   The aim of the present work is to investigate the impact of an invasive aquatic insect on the co-occurrence patterns of native species of insects along a salinity gradient, and determine which assembly rules are driving these patterns.
   First, we characterised the habitat specialisation and functional niches of each species from physiological and biological traits, respectively, and their degree of overlap. Second, we used field data to compare the co-occurrence patterns of native and invasive species in invaded and non-invaded areas of southern Iberia and northern Morocco. Finally, we tested if habitat filtering or niche differentiation assembly rules mediate their co-occurrence.
   In non-invaded areas, habitat filtering drives habitat segregation of species along the salinity gradient, with a lower contribution of niche differentiation. The presence of the invasive insect modifies the distribution and co-occurrence patterns of native species. In invaded areas, niche differentiation seems to be the main mechanism to avoid competition among the invasive and native species, enabling coexistence and resource partitioning.
   The combined study of functional niche similarity and abiotic stressor tolerance of invasive and native species can improve our understanding of the effects of invasive species along abiotic stress gradients. This approach may increase our capacity to predict the outcomes of biological invasion in a global change context.
RI Millan, Andres/D-3655-2009; Green, Andy/A-5189-2008; CSIC, EBD
   Donana/C-4157-2011
OI Millan, Andres/0000-0003-0036-363X; Green, Andy/0000-0002-1268-4951;
   CSIC, EBD Donana/0000-0003-4318-6602; Coccia,
   Cristina/0000-0002-0832-2050; Gutierrez Canovas,
   Cayetano/0000-0002-6785-4049
TC 5
Z9 6
SN 0269-8463
EI 1365-2435
PD OCT
PY 2017
VL 31
IS 10
BP 1957
EP 1968
DI 10.1111/1365-2435.12884
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000412100000011
ER

PT J
AU Rosado, BHP
   de Mattos, EA
AF Rosado, Bruno H. P.
   de Mattos, Eduardo A.
TI On the relative importance of CSR ecological strategies and integrative
   traits to explain species dominance at local scales
SO FUNCTIONAL ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE alternative functional designs; community assembly; CSR theory;
   functional traits; hierarchy of traits; leaf economic spectrum; multiple
   phenotypes
ID SANDY COASTAL-PLAIN; FUNCTIONAL TRAITS; PLANT ECOLOGY; CLASSIFICATION;
   COMMUNITIES; DIVERSITY; RELEVANCE; RICH
AB Identifying ecological strategies based on functional traits has been one of the main focuses of studies on plant community assembly. Recently, an important and timely tool, 'StrateFy', has been proposed for detecting plant strategies across the globe according to the CSR scheme. The CSR scheme is undeniably efficient across scales, and distinct CSR strategies among species have been proposed to explain differing degrees of dominance among species. However, in a previous study we showed that dominance ranking of woody species in a resource-poor habitat (coastal sandy plain) was not explained by morphological traits commonly measured in functional approaches (such as those used to estimate CSR strategies), but by integrative traits (i. e. traits that are the result of different combinations of functional traits) more related to plant performance.
   Here, we used CSR analysis and StrateFy on a dataset collected on a coastal sandy plain to test the hypothesis that the dominance ranking would be compatible with the CSR strategies; that is, that dominant species would show a greater proportion of the stress-tolerance strategy (S%) than subordinate species.
   Contrary to our hypothesis, all species exhibited an S/CS strategy, and the most dominant species had neither similar values nor the highest S%. The inability of CSR analysis (as applied using StrateFy) to predict dominance ranking suggests that it can explain relative dominance when different strategies co-occur, but not in cases where dominant and subordinate plants share the same strategy.
   We argue that the relative importance of CSR and integrative traits for describing dominance ranking may depend on how CSR strategies are filtered in each environment. In environments where only a narrow range of strategy classes are viable, integrative traits may be more important for explaining variation in degrees of dominance. Thus, the ability of a given species to achieve dominance may depend on integrative traits resulting from multiple trait arrays, not necessarily captured by the specific leaf area, leaf dry mass content and leaf area measurements that are used to calculate the relative proportions of strategies in StrateFy.
RI Rosado, Bruno/B-3534-2013
OI Rosado, Bruno/0000-0002-8924-8672
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 0269-8463
EI 1365-2435
PD OCT
PY 2017
VL 31
IS 10
BP 1969
EP 1974
DI 10.1111/1365-2435.12894
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000412100000012
ER

PT J
AU Villeger, S
   Brosse, S
   Mouchet, M
   Mouillot, D
   Vanni, MJ
AF Villeger, Sebastien
   Brosse, Sebastien
   Mouchet, Maud
   Mouillot, David
   Vanni, Michael J.
TI Functional ecology of fish: current approaches and future challenges
SO AQUATIC SCIENCES
DT Article
DE Ocean; River; Biodiversity; Functional trait; Global change; Ecosystem
   services; Fish
ID FRESH-WATER FISH; CORAL-REEF FISHES; LIFE-HISTORY STRATEGIES;
   DIETARY-MORPHOLOGICAL RELATIONSHIPS; LABRID FISHES; CENTRARCHID FISHES;
   FOOD-WEB; PHOSPHORUS-LIMITATION; POPULATION REGULATION; ECOSYSTEM
   PROCESSES
AB Fish communities face increasing anthropogenic pressures in freshwater and marine ecosystems that modify their biodiversity and threaten the services they supply to human populations. To address these issues, studies have been increasingly focusing on functions of fish that are linked to their main ecological roles in aquatic ecosystems. Fish are indeed known to control other organisms through predation, mediate nutrient fluxes, and can act as ecosystem engineers. Here for each of the key functions played by fish, we present the functional traits that have already been used to assess them. We include traits measurable from observations on living individuals, morphological features measured on preserved organisms or traits categorized using information from the literature, and we discuss their respective advantages and limitations. We then list future research directions to foster a more complete functional approach for fish ecology that needs to incorporate functional traits describing, food provisioning and cultural services while accounting more frequently for intraspecific variability. Finally, we highlight ecological and evolutionary questions that could be addressed using meta-analyses of large trait databases, and how a trait-based framework could provide valuable insights on the mechanistic links between global changes, functional diversity of fish assemblages, and ecosystem services.
RI Villeger, Sebastien/C-6272-2011
OI Villeger, Sebastien/0000-0002-2362-7178; Brosse,
   Sebastien/0000-0002-3659-8177
TC 11
Z9 11
SN 1015-1621
EI 1420-9055
PD OCT
PY 2017
VL 79
IS 4
BP 783
EP 801
DI 10.1007/s00027-017-0546-z
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000410781000001
ER

PT J
AU Feio, MJ
   Almeida, SFP
   Aguiar, FC
AF Feio, Maria Joao
   Almeida, Salome F. P.
   Aguiar, Francisca C.
TI Functional associations between microalgae, macrophytes and
   invertebrates distinguish river types
SO AQUATIC SCIENCES
DT Article
DE Aquatic plants; Diatoms; Macroinvertebrates; Functional assessment;
   Riparian trees; Species traits
ID STABLE-ISOTOPE ANALYSIS; LITTER DECOMPOSITION; ECOSYSTEM PROCESSES;
   BENTHIC MACROINVERTEBRATES; LATITUDINAL GRADIENT; FLOOD DISTURBANCE;
   CONTINUUM CONCEPT; RIPARIAN FORESTS; TAXONOMIC GROUPS; TROPICAL STREAM
AB Contemporary large-scale river ecology is grounded on the existence of patterns in the distribution of aquatic communities, structured by prevailing abiotic conditions. Here, we investigated the existence of functional consistent associations of traits (i.e., traits appearing consistently together at different sites and the same river type) between different biological elements of the aquatic community, assuming that species traits confer them advantages for certain environmental conditions but also within the aquatic community. If this is true, these trait associations should be consistently found in water bodies with similar characteristics (river types), defining different types of ecosystem functioning. To test this, 79 least-disturbed sites, belonging to five well-defined Portuguese river types and covering the longitudinal river gradient were used: headwaters of semi-arid streams, mountainous streams and northern-Atlantic climate streams, middle reaches and lowland large rivers. For each river type, we analyzed the strongest associations (via the Bray-Curtis coefficient) between diatoms, benthic invertebrates and macrophytes and traits that could be relevant to their interactions (e.g., invertebrate trophic groups, mobility/fixation ability of diatoms, macrophyte affinity to water) against a priori predictions. The strongest associations of traits changed over the river continuum with an increase in their complexity (number of associations) from headwaters to middle reaches and a decrease in lowland large rivers. These changes were not related to total richness, which was similar for all river types and over the continuum (ca. 100 taxa). In the three types of headwaters, there were also clear differences in associations among aquatic elements. The importance of riparian trees in small streams was not as high as expected while instream macrophytes were more relevant than predicted. This study revealed the existence of predictable functional associations that could serve as a basis for the functional assessment of running waters.
RI Aguiar, Francisca/F-9981-2010
OI Aguiar, Francisca/0000-0003-2207-0264; Almeida,
   Salome/0000-0001-7240-7967; Feio, Maria/0000-0003-0362-6802
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1015-1621
EI 1420-9055
PD OCT
PY 2017
VL 79
IS 4
BP 909
EP 923
DI 10.1007/s00027-017-0541-4
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000410781000010
ER

PT J
AU Webster, NS
   Reusch, TBH
AF Webster, Nicole S.
   Reusch, Thorsten B. H.
TI Microbial contributions to the persistence of coral reefs
SO ISME JOURNAL
DT Article
ID OCEAN ACIDIFICATION; CLIMATE-CHANGE; SPONGE SYMBIONTS; EVOLUTIONARY;
   ADAPTATION; COMMUNITIES; RESILIENCE; DIVERSITY; ENVIRONMENTS;
   CONVERGENCE
AB On contemplating the adaptive capacity of reef organisms to a rapidly changing environment, the microbiome offers significant and greatly unrecognised potential. Microbial symbionts contribute to the physiology, development, immunity and behaviour of their hosts, and can respond very rapidly to changing environmental conditions, providing a powerful mechanism for acclimatisation and also possibly rapid evolution of coral reef holobionts. Environmentally acquired fluctuations in the microbiome can have significant functional consequences for the holobiont phenotype upon which selection can act. Environmentally induced changes in microbial abundance may be analogous to host gene duplication, symbiont switching / shuffling as a result of environmental change can either remove or introduce raw genetic material into the holobiont; and horizontal gene transfer can facilitate rapid evolution within microbial strains. Vertical transmission of symbionts is a key feature of many reef holobionts and this would enable environmentally acquired microbial traits to be faithfully passed to future generations, ultimately facilitating microbiome-mediated transgenerational acclimatisation (MMTA) and potentially even adaptation of reef species in a rapidly changing climate. In this commentary, we highlight the capacity and mechanisms for MMTA in reef species, propose a modified Price equation as a framework for assessing MMTA and recommend future areas of research to better understand how microorganisms contribute to the transgenerational acclimatisation of reef organisms, which is essential if we are to reliably predict the consequences of global change for reef ecosystems.
OI Webster, Nicole/0000-0002-4753-5278; Reusch, Thorsten B.
   H./0000-0002-8961-4337
TC 13
Z9 13
SN 1751-7362
EI 1751-7370
PD OCT
PY 2017
VL 11
IS 10
BP 2167
EP 2174
DI 10.1038/ismej.2017.66
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Microbiology
UT WOS:000411136300002
PM 28509908
ER

PT J
AU Felcmanova, K
   Lukes, M
   Kotabova, E
   Lawrenz, E
   Halsey, KH
   Prasil, O
AF Felcmanova, Kristina
   Lukes, Martin
   Kotabova, Eva
   Lawrenz, Evelyn
   Halsey, Kimberly H.
   Prasil, Ondrej
TI Carbon use efficiencies and allocation strategies in Prochlorococcus
   marinus strain PCC 9511 during nitrogen-limited growth
SO PHOTOSYNTHESIS RESEARCH
DT Article
DE Prochlorococcus marinus; Cyanobacteria; Primary production; Nitrogen
   limitation; Carbon allocation
ID TRANSFORM INFRARED-SPECTROSCOPY; PHOTOSYNTHETIC PROKARYOTE;
   PHOTOSYSTEM-II; QUANTUM YIELD; ELECTRON FLOW; PHYTOPLANKTON; LIGHT;
   CYANOBACTERIA; SYNECHOCOCCUS; OXYGEN
AB We studied cell properties including carbon allocation dynamics in the globally abundant and important cyanobacterium Prochlorococcus marinus strain PCC 9511 grown at three different growth rates in nitrogen-limited continuous cultures. With increasing nitrogen limitation, cellular divinyl chlorophyll a and the functional absorption cross section of Photosystem II decreased, although maximal photosynthetic efficiency of PSII remained unaltered across all N-limited growth rates. Chl-specific gross and net carbon primary production were also invariant with nutrient-limited growth rate, but only 20% of Chl-specific gross carbon primary production was retained in the biomass across all growth rates. In nitrogen-replete cells, 60% of the assimilated carbon was incorporated into the protein pool while only 30% was incorporated into carbohydrates. As N limitation increased, new carbon became evenly distributed between these two pools. While many of these physiological traits are similar to those measured in other algae, there are also distinct differences, particularly the lower overall efficiency of carbon utilization. The latter provides new information needed for understanding and estimating primary production, particularly in the nutrient-limited tropical oceans where P. marinus dominates phytoplankton community composition.
RI Kotabova, Eva/E-4560-2011; Prasil, Ondrej/H-2454-2014
OI Kotabova, Eva/0000-0003-1092-3020; Prasil, Ondrej/0000-0002-0012-4359;
   Halsey, Kimberly/0000-0002-1407-0777
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 0166-8595
EI 1573-5079
PD OCT
PY 2017
VL 134
IS 1
BP 71
EP 82
DI 10.1007/s11120-017-0418-3
SC Plant Sciences
UT WOS:000411172800007
PM 28721457
ER

PT J
AU Kruk, C
   Devercelli, M
   Huszar, VLM
   Hernandez, E
   Beamud, G
   Diaz, M
   Silva, LHS
   Segura, AM
AF Kruk, Carla
   Devercelli, Melina
   Huszar, Vera L. M.
   Hernandez, Esnedy
   Beamud, Guadalupe
   Diaz, Monica
   Silva, Lucia H. S.
   Segura, Angel M.
TI Classification of Reynolds phytoplankton functional groups using
   individual traits and machine learning techniques
SO FRESHWATER BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE Classification and Regression Trees; freshwater ecosystems;
   morphological traits; Random Forest; taxonomic classification
ID TEMPERATE LAKES; RANDOM FORESTS; MARINE-PHYTOPLANKTON; NUTRIENT
   LIMITATION; COMMUNITY ECOLOGY; STEADY-STATE; PARANA RIVER; ASSEMBLAGES;
   PLANKTON; SUCCESSION
AB The Reynolds Functional Groups (RFG) classification scheme is an informative and widely used method in ecological studies of freshwater phytoplankton. It clusters species with similar traits, as well as common environmental sensitivities and tolerances. However, researchers face the difficulty to classify species into RFG because it relies in expert opinion, taxonomical knowledge and environmental information, which are not always accessible. Thus, a step forward is to build general statistical models to classify species into RFG. Under the hypothesis that an organism's response to environmental conditionsdetermines their functional traits, here represented by the RFG, we predict that morphology and classification into broad taxonomic groups willexplain RFG independently from environmental information and expert knowledge. To evaluate the predictive ability of morphological traits (e.g. volume) and taxonomic affiliation (e.g. chroococcal Cyanobacteria) as discriminant variables of RFG, we compiled 1,300 species (264 waterbodies) and applied Random Forest (RF) and Classification and Regression Trees (CART). We divided the data to train the models and test their performance. RF successfully classified species into the 28 RFG (only c. 10% test error) with an average individual RFG success rate of 84.6 (range=33%-100%). This is a relatively high percentage of success from an ecological point of view. It suggests that the selected variables are able to reconstruct the RFG and represent well environmental preferences, without including information about local environmental conditions as classifiers. Our results reinforce the functional basis of the RFG and support both morphological traits and taxonomic classification as good proxies of phytoplankton responses to environmental conditions. A dichotomous key based on the CART was constructed, and an R code to classify species into the RFG is freely available. This work may help users to classify species into the RFG, including those that were not previously listed in the Reynolds classification system.
RI Huszar, Vera/J-7126-2012; Silva, Lucia/A-7404-2016
OI Silva, Lucia/0000-0002-9533-3603; Devercelli, Melina/0000-0002-0464-2997
TC 4
Z9 6
SN 0046-5070
EI 1365-2427
PD OCT
PY 2017
VL 62
IS 10
BP 1681
EP 1692
DI 10.1111/fwb.12968
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000410094000002
ER

PT J
AU Bortolini, JC
   Pineda, A
   Rodrigues, LC
   Jati, S
   Velho, LFM
AF Bortolini, Jascieli Carla
   Pineda, Alfonso
   Rodrigues, Luzia Cleide
   Jati, Susicley
   Machado Velho, Luiz Felipe
TI Environmental and spatial processes influencing phytoplankton biomass
   along a reservoirs-river-floodplain lakes gradient: A metacommunity
   approach
SO FRESHWATER BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE asymmetric eigenvector maps; environmental heterogeneity; mass effect;
   planktonic algae; species sorting
ID UPPER PARANA RIVER; COMMUNITY STRUCTURE; DIVERSITY PATTERNS; FUNCTIONAL
   TRAITS; DISPERSAL MODE; BIODIVERSITY; DISTURBANCE; DYNAMICS; BRAZIL;
   CONNECTIVITY
AB Evaluation of the relative influences of environmental and spatial processes in structuring aquatic metacommunities is an essential first step for understanding how these factors govern species distributions and affect spatial and temporal variability in community structure. Such variability has many causes and consequences at different scales. In the case of phytoplankton metacommunities, both species sorting and mass effect processes are likely to be important in structuring the patterns of biomass distribution on large spatial scales. We investigated the influences of environmental and spatial components on the phytoplankton community on a large spatial scale, consisting of a reservoirs-river-floodplain lakes gradient in a Neotropical region. Using partial redundancy analysis, we partitioned the relative role of environmental (environmental filters) and spatial (asymmetric eigenvector maps) processes structuring phytoplankton biomass. A clear difference of the limnological conditions was observed between the reservoirs and river-floodplain lakes system. High species richness and higher mean values of phytoplankton biomass were recorded in the floodplain lakes. Variation partitioning demonstrated the importance of both environmental and spatial process in phytoplankton biomass structuring. However, the relative importance of these processes may vary over time. Our results suggest that from a metacommunity perspective, the phytoplankton biomass of upstream reservoirs and a downstream river-floodplain lakes system is determined by environmental conditions (species sorting process), mainly in the floodplain lakes; and by high dispersion rates favoured by the connectivity and unidirectional flow (mass effect process), mainly between the reservoirs and the river.
RI Velho, Luiz Felipe/I-9130-2016; Rodrigues, Luzia/B-7856-2017
OI Velho, Luiz Felipe/0000-0001-8111-4955; Rodrigues,
   Luzia/0000-0002-0593-0931
TC 3
Z9 5
SN 0046-5070
EI 1365-2427
PD OCT
PY 2017
VL 62
IS 10
BP 1756
EP 1767
DI 10.1111/fwb.12986
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000410094000008
ER

PT J
AU Bowler, DE
   Haase, P
   Hof, C
   Kroncke, I
   Baert, L
   Dekoninck, W
   Domisch, S
   Hendrickx, F
   Hickler, T
   Neumann, H
   O'Hara, RB
   Sell, AF
   Sonnewald, M
   Stoll, S
   Turkay, M
   van Klink, R
   Schweiger, O
   Vermeulen, R
   Bohning-Gaese, K
AF Bowler, Diana E.
   Haase, Peter
   Hof, Christian
   Kroencke, Ingrid
   Baert, Leon
   Dekoninck, Wouter
   Domisch, Sami
   Hendrickx, Frederik
   Hickler, Thomas
   Neumann, Hermann
   O'Hara, Robert B.
   Sell, Anne F.
   Sonnewald, Moritz
   Stoll, Stefan
   Tuerkay, Michael
   van Klink, Roel
   Schweiger, Oliver
   Vermeulen, Rikjan
   Boehning-Gaese, Katrin
TI Cross-taxa generalities in the relationship between population abundance
   and ambient temperatures
SO PROCEEDINGS OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY B-BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES
DT Article
DE climate change; population size; time series; trait-based analysis;
   weather
ID CLIMATE-CHANGE IMPACTS; BIRD COMMUNITIES; GLOBAL CHANGE; RANGE SHIFTS;
   NORTH-SEA; LAND-USE; DYNAMICS; DIVERSITY; TRAITS; VARIABILITY
AB Identifying patterns in the effects of temperature on species' population abundances could help develop a general framework for predicting the consequences of climate change across different communities and realms. We used long-term population time series data from terrestrial, freshwater, and marine species communities within central Europe to compare the effects of temperature on abundance across a broad range of taxonomic groups. We asked whether there was an average relationship between temperatures in different seasons and annual abundances of species in a community, and whether species attributes (temperature range of distribution, range size, habitat breadth, dispersal ability, body size, and lifespan) explained interspecific variation in the relationship between temperature and abundance. We found that, on average, warmer winter temperatures were associated with greater abundances in terrestrial communities (ground beetles, spiders, and birds) but not always in aquatic communities (freshwater and marine invertebrates and fish). The abundances of species with large geographical ranges, larger body sizes, and longer lifespans tended to be less related to temperature. Our results suggest that climate change may have, in general, positive effects on species' abundances within many terrestrial communities in central Europe while the effects are less predictable in aquatic communities.
RI O'Hara, Robert/A-7499-2008; Stoll, Stefan/D-5278-2011; Haase,
   Peter/A-5644-2011; Hof, Christian/J-8888-2014
OI O'Hara, Robert/0000-0001-9737-3724; Stoll, Stefan/0000-0002-3656-417X;
   Hof, Christian/0000-0002-7763-1885; Domisch, Sami/0000-0002-8127-9335
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 0962-8452
EI 1471-2954
PD SEP 27
PY 2017
VL 284
IS 1863
AR 20170870
DI 10.1098/rspb.2017.0870
SC Life Sciences & Biomedicine - Other Topics; Environmental Sciences &
   Ecology; Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000411723200013
PM 28931734
ER

PT J
AU Taherzadeh, N
   Kerimoglu, O
   Wirtz, KW
AF Taherzadeh, Niousha
   Kerimoglu, Onur
   Wirtz, Kai W.
TI Can we predict phytoplankton community size structure using size
   scalings of eco-physiological traits?
SO ECOLOGICAL MODELLING
DT Article
DE Allometric scaling; Non-uniform scaling; Size-based model; Multi-species
   model; Community structure; Subsistence quota
ID MAXIMAL GROWTH-RATES; CELL-SIZE; INTERMEDIATE DISTURBANCE; FUNCTIONAL
   DIVERSITY; VOLUME RELATIONSHIPS; NUTRIENT LIMITATION; MECHANISTIC
   ORIGINS; MULTISPECIES MODEL; MARINE DIATOMS; SINKING RATE
AB Cell size is an important determining factor for predicting the physiological and ecological properties of phytoplankton. Size dependencies in eco-physiological properties are in general reported as log log linear scaling relationships. Considerable uncertainty in these allometries, hence, limits our ability to link them to observed changes in phytoplankton community structures. In this study, we develop a size-based multi-species phytoplankton model and assess the sensitivity of the predicted community size structure to variations in allometric coefficients. The model describes the nutrient phytoplankton detritus dynamics within the upper mixed layer for a matrix of habitats, which are characterized by the deep layer nutrient concentration and mixing frequency. Predicted diatom community mean cell size becomes maximal at intermediate mixing frequencies, which confirms the importance of storage capacity (relative to the subsistence demand) at intermittent nutrient supplies. Smaller subsistence demand of large diatoms makes a critical factor in shaping the community size structure, while in environments with either short or long nutrient replenishment periods, maximum growth rate gains similar or more importance. Notably, in these environments, the diatom community converges towards unrealistically small species when we assumed a uniform (log log linear) allometry in maximum growth rate. Independent theoretical and empirical arguments motivated the usage of non-uniform growth scaling, with which the minimal diatom cell size actually observed in nature is realized in long-term simulations. Using allometries parameterized for the entire phytoplankton community, the subsistence advantage of the larger species becomes insignificant, leading to a ubiquitous dominance of smaller species, even when assuming non-uniform scaling in maximum growth rate. This finding corresponds with the observed dominance of pico-phytoplankton in many parts of the ocean. All combinations of physiological allometries for diatom or mixed communities, however, underestimate both the mean cell size of the community and also size diversity. This may indicate a significant role of other ecological selection mechanisms, such as arising from size-selective grazing. The approach outlined in this paper helps to better assess the limits and the potential of size based phytoplankton models as an increasingly important tool in plankton research. (C) 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
OI Kerimoglu, Onur/0000-0003-4289-4404
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0304-3800
EI 1872-7026
PD SEP 24
PY 2017
VL 360
BP 279
EP 289
DI 10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2017.07.008
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000411771800026
ER

PT J
AU Alexandridis, N
   Dambacher, JM
   Jean, F
   Desroy, N
   Bacher, C
AF Alexandridis, Nikolaos
   Dambacher, Jeffrey M.
   Jean, Fred
   Desroy, Nicolas
   Bacher, Cedric
TI Qualitative modelling of functional relationships in marine benthic
   communities
SO ECOLOGICAL MODELLING
DT Article
DE Benthic macroinvertebrates; Biological traits; Biotic interactions;
   Community assembly; Functional groups; Qualitative modelling
ID COMPLEX FOOD WEBS; BODY-SIZE; ECOLOGICAL NETWORKS; BIODIVERSITY;
   DIVERSITY; SYSTEMS; COMPETITION; MECHANISMS; GROWTH; SCALE
AB In order to better understand and predict the dynamics of benthic macroinvertebrate communities, we need to first define the functional components of benthic biodiversity and then provide a mechanistic description of how they interact with their abiotic environment, their basic resources and each other. These interactions should be largely controlled by readily available biological traits, making trait-based modelling an ideal framework for the synthesis of relevant hypotheses from ecological theory and expert knowledge. With the help of benthic species traits, we derived a set of first principles regarding the role of organisms in processes of environmental filtering, consumption of algae/detritus, predation, use of space, biogenic habitat modification and trade-offs in the utilization and allocation of resources. These principles were incorporated into qualitative models in the form of functional relationships linking groups of,benthic organisms in the Rance estuary (Brittany, France). The general stability of these models illustrates their potential to persist in time and to constitute a plausible representation of the natural world. Their structure provides insight into the role of various community assembly mechanisms and the direction that the system might take in response to perturbations. The results are expected to inform the development of quantitative models reproducing the spatial and temporal dynamics of marine benthic biodiversity in the Rance estuary. (C) 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
RI Jean, Fred/A-8226-2010
OI Jean, Fred/0000-0002-1132-230X; Bacher, Cedric/0000-0001-6090-4667
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 0304-3800
EI 1872-7026
PD SEP 24
PY 2017
VL 360
BP 300
EP 312
DI 10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2017.07.021
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000411771800028
ER

PT J
AU Westermeier, AS
   Fleischmann, A
   Muller, K
   Schaferhoff, B
   Rubach, C
   Speck, T
   Poppinga, S
AF Westermeier, Anna Sofia
   Fleischmann, Andreas
   Mueller, Kai
   Schaeferhoff, Bastian
   Rubach, Carmen
   Speck, Thomas
   Poppinga, Simon
TI Trap diversity and character evolution in carnivorous bladderworts
   (Utricularia, Lentibulariaceae)
SO SCIENTIFIC REPORTS
DT Article
ID PHYLOGENETIC ANALYSES; MIXED MODELS; ARCHITECTURE; SEQUENCES; INTRON;
   GENOME; SIZE
AB Bladderworts (Utricularia, Lentibulariaceae, Lamiales) constitute the largest genus of carnivorous plants but only aquatic species (about one fifth of the genus) have so far been thoroughly studied as to their suction trap functioning. In this study, we comparatively investigated trap biomechanics in 19 Utricularia species to examine correlations between life-forms, trapping mechanisms, and functional-morphological traits. Our investigations show the existence of two functional trap principles (passive trap in U. multifida vs. active suction traps), and - in active suction traps - three main trapdoor movement types (with several subtypes). The trapdoor movement types and their corresponding functional-morphological features most presumably represent adaptations to the respective habitat. We furthermore give insights into fluid dynamics during suction in three representatives of the main types of trapdoor movement. The results on functional morphology and trapdoor movement were mapped onto a new phylogenetic reconstruction of the genus, derived from the rapidly evolving chloroplast regions trnK, rps16 and trnQ-rps16 and a sampling of 105 Utricularia species in total. We discuss potential scenarios of trap character evolution and species radiation, highlighting possible key innovations that enable such a unique carnivorous lifestyle in different habitats.
OI Poppinga, Simon/0000-0001-5341-9188; Speck, Thomas/0000-0002-2245-2636;
   Westermeier, Anna/0000-0001-9281-1254
TC 5
Z9 5
SN 2045-2322
PD SEP 21
PY 2017
VL 7
AR 12052
DI 10.1038/s41598-017-12324-4
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000411416600009
PM 28935893
ER

PT J
AU Ellis, JI
   Clark, D
   Atalah, J
   Jiang, W
   Taiapa, C
   Patterson, M
   Sinner, J
   Hewitt, J
AF Ellis, J. I.
   Clark, D.
   Atalah, J.
   Jiang, W.
   Taiapa, C.
   Patterson, M.
   Sinner, J.
   Hewitt, J.
TI Multiple stressor effects on marine infauna: responses of estuarine taxa
   and functional traits to sedimentation, nutrient and metal loading
SO SCIENTIFIC REPORTS
DT Article
ID SUSPENSION-FEEDING BIVALVE; SPECIES SENSITIVITY DISTRIBUTIONS; QUALITY
   GUIDELINES; ATRINA-ZELANDICA; CLIMATE-CHANGE; MACROBENTHIC COMMUNITIES;
   LOGISTIC-REGRESSION; SUSPENDED SEDIMENT; BIOLOGICAL TRAITS; TAURANGA
   HARBOR
AB Sedimentation, nutrients and metal loading to coastal environments are increasing, associated with urbanization and global warming, hence there is a growing need to predict ecological responses to such change. Using a regression technique we predicted how maximum abundance of 20 macrobenthic taxa and 22 functional traits separately and interactively responded to these key stressors. The abundance of most taxa declined in response to sedimentation and metal loading while a unimodal response was often associated with nutrient loading. Optimum abundances for both taxa and traits occurred at relatively low stressor levels, highlighting the vulnerability of estuaries to increasing stressor loads. Individual taxa were more susceptible to stress than traits, suggesting that functional traits may be less sensitive for detecting changes in ecosystem health. Multiplicative effects were more common than additive interactions. The observed sensitivity of most taxa to increasing sedimentation and metal loading and the documented interaction effects between multiple stressors have important implications for understanding and managing the ecological consequences of eutrophication, sedimentation and contaminants on coastal ecosystems.
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 2045-2322
PD SEP 20
PY 2017
VL 7
AR 12013
DI 10.1038/s41598-017-12323-5
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000411185100066
PM 28931887
ER

PT J
AU Blain, HA
   Arribas, OJ
AF Blain, Hugues-Alexandre
   Arribas, Oscar J.
TI A description of the skeletal morphology of Rana pyrenaica (Anura:
   Ranidae), with comments on functional morphology, ecological adaptation
   and relationships with other Iberian ranids
SO ZOOTAXA
DT Article
DE Amphibia; taxonomy; osteology; ecology; adaptation to aquatic
   environment; spring-dwelling species; Pyrenean mountain range
ID BROWN FROGS; GENUS RANA; TEMPORARIA; AMPHIBIA
AB Despite being described in 1993, the skeleton of Rana pyrenaica Serra-Cobo, 1993 has never been investigated. The present publication thus represents the first description of the osteology of the spring-dwelling Pyrenean small brown frog. Its specific status is osteologically supported by some discrete differences. When compared with other Iberian brown frogs, it shows a mosaic of characters that are difficult to interpret. However, according to ecomorphology, R. pyrenaica shares a robust skeleton morphology and various morphological traits with the more terrestrial Rana temporaria (Linnaeus, 1758), but also shares some more aquatic life osteological characters with the aquatic Rana iberica Boulenger, 1879. As well as increasing what is known about R. pyrenaica, this study also aims to facilitate the correct diagnosis of the species in fossil assemblages and its osteological identification as the prey of other vertebrates in trophic studies.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1175-5326
EI 1175-5334
PD SEP 13
PY 2017
VL 4319
IS 3
BP 510
EP 530
DI 10.11646/zootaxa.4319.3.5
SC Zoology
UT WOS:000410502300005
ER

PT J
AU Gerovasileiou, V
   Dimitriadis, C
   Arvanitidis, C
   Voultsiadou, E
AF Gerovasileiou, Vasilis
   Dimitriadis, Charalampos
   Arvanitidis, Christos
   Voultsiadou, Eleni
TI Taxonomic and functional surrogates of sessile benthic diversity in
   Mediterranean marine caves
SO PLOS ONE
DT Article
ID SPECIES-DIVERSITY; SUBMARINE CAVES; INDO-PACIFIC; BIODIVERSITY;
   COMMUNITIES; ASSEMBLAGES; ECOSYSTEM; SEA; GRADIENT; SPONGES
AB Hard substrates host globally a rich biodiversity, orders of magnitude higher in species number than that in surrounding soft substrates. Among them, marine caves support unique biodiversity and fragile communities but suffer lack of quantitative data on their structure and function, hindering their conservation status assessment. A first approach to the nondestructive ecological monitoring of marine caves by testing surrogates of structural and functional composition of sessile benthos was attempted in two species-rich Mediterranean marine caves. Photographic sampling was performed in different positions on the cave walls, across the horizontal axis, from the entrance inwards. Eighty-four taxa were identified and assigned to 6 biological traits and 32 modalities related to morphology, behavior and ecological affinities, with sponges being the dominant taxon in species richness and coverage. In quest of possible biological surrogates, we examined the spatial variability of the total community structure and function and separately the sponge community structure and function. The observed patterns of the above metrics were significantly correlated with the distance from the entrance, the small-scale variability and their interaction. A positive correlation was found between all examined pairs of those metrics, supporting that: (i) the developed functional approach could be used for the study of marine cave sessile communities, and (ii) sponges could be used as a surrogate taxon for the structural and functional study of these communities. The suggested method could be tested in other types of hard substrate habitats and in multiple locations of the Mediterranean waters, facilitating monitoring schemes and conservation actions.
RI Voultsiadou, Eleni/P-9890-2017
OI Voultsiadou, Eleni/0000-0003-3429-6754; Gerovasileiou,
   Vasilis/0000-0002-9143-7480
TC 5
Z9 5
SN 1932-6203
PD SEP 6
PY 2017
VL 12
IS 9
AR e0183707
DI 10.1371/journal.pone.0183707
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000409391200037
PM 28877222
ER

PT J
AU Nash, KL
   Watson, RA
   Halpern, BS
   Fulton, EA
   Blanchard, JL
AF Nash, Kirsty L.
   Watson, Reg A.
   Halpern, Benjamin S.
   Fulton, Elizabeth A.
   Blanchard, Julia L.
TI Improving understanding of the functional diversity of fisheries by
   exploring the influence of global catch reconstruction
SO SCIENTIFIC REPORTS
DT Article
ID MARINE FISHERIES; PLANETARY BOUNDARY; CORAL-REEFS; BIODIVERSITY; TRAITS;
   VULNERABILITY; COMMUNITIES; REDUNDANCY; FRAMEWORK
AB Functional diversity is thought to enhance ecosystem resilience, driving research focused on trends in the functional composition of fisheries, most recently with new reconstructions of global catch data. However, there is currently little understanding of how accounting for unreported catches (e.g. small-scale and illegal fisheries, bycatch and discards) influences functional diversity trends in global fisheries. We explored how diversity estimates varied among reported and unreported components of catch in 2010, and found these components had distinct functional fingerprints. Incorporating unreported catches had little impact on global-scale functional diversity patterns. However, at smaller, management-relevant scales, the effects of incorporating unreported catches were large (changes in functional diversity of up to 46%). Our results suggest there is greater uncertainty about the risks to ecosystem integrity and resilience from current fishing patterns than previously recognized. We provide recommendations and suggest a research agenda to improve future assessments of functional diversity of global fisheries.
RI Fulton, Elizabeth/A-2871-2008
OI Fulton, Elizabeth/0000-0002-5904-7917; Blanchard,
   Julia/0000-0003-0532-4824; Nash, Kirsty/0000-0003-0976-3197
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 2045-2322
PD SEP 6
PY 2017
VL 7
AR 10746
DI 10.1038/s41598-017-10723-1
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000409439900164
PM 28878250
ER

PT J
AU Bonito, A
   Ricotta, C
   Iberite, M
   Gratani, L
   Varone, L
AF Bonito, Andrea
   Ricotta, Carlo
   Iberite, Mauro
   Gratani, Loretta
   Varone, Laura
TI CO2 sequestration in two mediterranean dune areas subjected to a
   different level of anthropogenic disturbance
SO ESTUARINE COASTAL AND SHELF SCIENCE
DT Article
DE Coastal blue,carbon; Ecosystem services; Economic value; Plant ground
   cover; Sand dune beaches
ID ECOSYSTEM SERVICES; CARBON SEQUESTRATION; COASTAL DUNES; BLUE CARBON;
   VEGETATION; STORAGE; HABITATS; VULNERABILITY; PERSPECTIVE; DIVERSITY
AB Coastal sand dunes are among the most threatened habitats, especially in the Mediterranean Basin, where the high levels of human pressure impair the presence of plant species, putting at risk the maintenance of the ecosystem services, such as CO2 sequestration provided by these habitats. The aim of this study was to analyze how disturbance-induced changes in plant species abundance patterns account for variations in annual CO2 sequestration flow (CS) of Mediterranean sand dune areas. Two sites characterized by a high (site HAD) and a lower (site LAD) anthropogenic disturbance level were selected. At both sites, plant species number, cover, height and CS based on net photosynthesis measurements were sampled. At the plant species level, our results highlighted that Ammophila arenaria and Pancratium maritimum, had a key role in CS. Moreover, the results revealed a patchy species assemblage in both sites. In particular, HAD was characterized by a higher extension of the anthropogenic aphytoic zone (64% of the total transect length) than LAD. In spite of the observed differences in plant species composition, there were not significant differences between HAD and IAD in structural and functional traits, such as plant height and net photosynthesis. As a consequence, HAD and LAD had a similar CS (443 and 421 Mg CO2 ha(-1) y(-1), respectively). From a monetary point of view, our estimates based on the social costs of carbon revealed that the flow of sequestered CO2 valued on an average $ 3181 +/- 114 ha(-1) year(-1) (mean value for the two sites). However, considering also the value of the CO2 negative flow related to loss of vegetated area, the annual net benefit arising from CO2 sequestration amounted to $ 1641 and $ 1772 for HAD and LAD, respectively. Overall, the results highlighted the importance to maximize the efforts to preserve dune habitats by applying an effective management policy, which could allow maintaining also a regulatory ecosystem service such as CO2 sequestration. (C) 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
OI Varone, Laura/0000-0002-9989-5283; RICOTTA, Carlo/0000-0003-0818-3959
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0272-7714
EI 1096-0015
PD SEP 5
PY 2017
VL 196
BP 22
EP 30
DI 10.1016/j.ecss.2017.06.040
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000411302000003
ER

PT J
AU Cruz-Morales, P
   Ramos-Aboites, HE
   Licona-Cassani, C
   Selem-Mojica, N
   Mejia-Ponce, PM
   Souza-Saldivar, V
   Barona-Gomez, F
AF Cruz-Morales, Pablo
   Ramos-Aboites, Hilda E.
   Licona-Cassani, Cuauhtemoc
   Selem-Mojica, Nelly
   Mejia-Ponce, Paulina M.
   Souza-Saldivar, Valeria
   Barona-Gomez, Francisco
TI Actinobacteria phylogenomics, selective isolation from an iron
   oligotrophic environment and siderophore functional characterization,
   unveil new desferrioxamine traits
SO FEMS MICROBIOLOGY ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE siderophores; desferrioxamine; Actinobacteria; phylogenomics; Cuatro
   Cienegas Basin
ID STREPTOMYCES-COELICOLOR A3(2); GENOME SEQUENCE; NATURAL-PRODUCT; GENE;
   BIOSYNTHESIS; BINDING; GROWTH; FERRICOELICHELIN; IDENTIFICATION;
   ACQUISITION
AB Desferrioxamines are hydroxamate siderophores widely conserved in both aquatic and soil-dwelling Actinobacteria. While the genetic and enzymatic bases of siderophore biosynthesis and their transport in model families of this phylum are well understood, evolutionary studies are lacking. Here, we perform a comprehensive desferrioxamine-centric (des genes) phylogenomic analysis, which includes the genomes of six novel strains isolated from an iron and phosphorous depleted oasis in the Chihuahuan desert of Mexico. Our analyses reveal previously unnoticed desferrioxamine evolutionary patterns, involving both biosynthetic and transport genes, likely to be related to desferrioxamines chemical diversity. The identified patterns were used to postulate experimentally testable hypotheses after phenotypic characterization, including profiling of siderophores production and growth stimulation of co-cultures under iron deficiency. Based in our results, we propose a novel des gene, which we term desG, as responsible for incorporation of phenylacetyl moieties during biosynthesis of previously reported arylated desferrioxamines. Moreover, a genomic-based classification of the siderophore-binding proteins responsible for specific and generalist siderophore assimilation is postulated. This report provides a much-needed evolutionary framework, with specific insights supported by experimental data, to direct the future ecological and functional analysis of desferrioxamines in the environment.
OI , Francisco/0000-0003-1492-9497
TC 5
Z9 5
SN 0168-6496
EI 1574-6941
PD SEP
PY 2017
VL 93
IS 9
AR fix086
DI 10.1093/femsec/fix086
SC Microbiology
UT WOS:000416387400001
PM 28910965
ER

PT J
AU Pan, YJ
   Zhang, XJ
   Song, K
   Da, LJ
AF Pan, Yingji
   Zhang, Xijin
   Song, Kun
   Da, Liangjun
TI Applying trait-based method to investigate the relationship between
   macrophyte communities and environmental conditions in a eutrophic
   freshwater lake, China
SO AQUATIC BOTANY
DT Article
DE Macrophytes community assembly; RLQ analysis; Fourth-corner methods;
   Functional traits; Eutrophication; Dianshan lake
ID 3 SUBMERSED MACROPHYTES; SPECIES TRAITS; LEAF-AREA; AQUATIC MACROPHYTES;
   4TH-CORNER PROBLEM; RESPONSES; GROWTH; DEPTH; NUTRIENTS; DIANSHAN
AB Trait-based community assembly analysis, which links the plant traits to the variation of community composition along environmental gradients, has potential to improve the understanding of the impacts of eutrophication on macrophytes and responding process. In this article, we pioneered the use of RLQ and Fourth-Corner methods that establish in a quantitative way the link between macrophyte traits, macrophyte community and water quality in a eutrophic shallow lake, eastern China. A total of 9 environmental variables and 11 macrophyte traits were included in the analysis. We found that total phosphorus in water (25.7%, the contribution to total inertia in RLQ analysis), suspended solids (20.7%), water transparency (17.1%) and Chlorophyll a (14.0%) were the main environmental variables that were associated the macrophyte traits matrix. Among macrophyte traits, life form (15.7%), responded to the environmental conditions the most, followed by leaf nitrogen (13.8%) and specific leaf area (13.6%). The correlation between macrophyte traits and environmental gradients showed that macrophytes with higher leaf nitrogen and higher specific leaf area grew at locations with clear water condition, better water transparency and with less total phosphorus, Chlorophyll a and suspended solids in this shallow eutrophic lake. The results suggested that the leaf nitrogen and specific leaf area of macrophytes had a trend to decrease with the increasing environmental stresses caused by eutrophication. Moreover, we highlighted that total phosphorus in water should be prior considered for the future macrophyte conservation and restoration in this lake.
OI Pan, Yingji/0000-0002-8203-3943
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0304-3770
EI 1879-1522
PD SEP
PY 2017
VL 142
BP 16
EP 24
DI 10.1016/j.aquabot.2017.06.002
SC Plant Sciences; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000412037100003
ER

PT J
AU Rodrigues, CAS
   Gurgel-LourenOo, RC
   Lima, SMQ
   de Oliveira, EF
   Sanchez-Botero, JI
AF Sousa Rodrigues-Filho, Carlos Alberto
   Gurgel-LourenOo, Ronaldo Cesar
   Queiroz Lima, Sergio Maia
   de Oliveira, Edson Fontes
   Sanchez-Botero, Jorge Ivan
TI What governs the functional diversity patterns of fishes in the
   headwater streams of the humid forest enclaves: environmental
   conditions, taxonomic diversity or biotic interactions?
SO ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY OF FISHES
DT Article
DE Fish community; Northeastern Brazil; Functional traits; Environmental
   filters; Taxonomic diversity
ID ASSEMBLAGE STRUCTURE; SPECIES RICHNESS; HABITAT; COMMUNITIES; VARIABLES;
   TRAITS; RIVER; BIODIVERSITY; ORGANIZATION; VARIABILITY
AB The relationship between functional and taxonomic diversity is a major issue in ecology. Biodiversity in aquatic environments is strongly influenced by environmental gradients that act as dispersion and niche barriers. Environmental conditions act as filters to select functional traits, but biotic interactions also play a role in assemblage structure. In headwater streams, the relationship between functional and taxonomic diversity remains unclear. In this study we investigated how environmental conditions, taxonomic diversity and biotic interactions influence the spatial distribution of traits and functional diversity in stream fish species. Standardized sampling of fish species was carried out in 50 m sections of 16 streams located in rainforest enclaves in a semiarid region of Brazil (Caatinga biome). The functional diversity indices displayed different responses to the predictor variables used. Functional richness was mainly influenced by environmental conditions, while functional evenness was mostly determined by taxonomic diversity. On the other hand, functional dispersion was explained by a combination of environmental conditions and taxonomic diversity. The spatial distribution of fish species with the same functional traits was random, indicating that biotic interactions are not a strong predictor in these ecosystems. Channel width, pH and substrate were the most important variables in the spatial distribution of the functional traits of the fish species. Our results suggest that the functional structure of fish assemblages in headwater streams depends mainly on environmental conditions and taxonomic diversity.
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 0378-1909
EI 1573-5133
PD SEP
PY 2017
VL 100
IS 9
BP 1023
EP 1032
DI 10.1007/s10641-017-0603-4
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000412126400001
ER

PT J
AU Rambo, H
   Stelzenmuller, V
   Greenstreet, SPR
   Mollmann, C
AF Rambo, Henrike
   Stelzenmueller, Vanessa
   Greenstreet, Simon P. R.
   Moellmann, Christian
TI Mapping fish community biodiversity for European marine policy
   requirements
SO ICES JOURNAL OF MARINE SCIENCE
DT Article
DE biodiversity hot-spots; biodiversity mapping; community sensitivity
   index; demersal fish community; MSFD; spatial statistics; species
   distribution; species diversity
ID EXCLUSIVE ECONOMIC ZONE; NORTH-SEA; SPECIES-DIVERSITY;
   SPATIAL-DISTRIBUTION; BETA-DIVERSITY; COUNT DATA; FISHERIES; MODELS;
   CONSERVATION; ABUNDANCE
AB Predictive maps of biodiversity patterns are pivotal to marine conservation and marine spatial planning alike, yet mapping of biodiversity indicators at the community-level is neither straightforward nor well-tested empirically. Two principle approaches exist. A direct approach involves calculation of indices for each sample, followed by interpolation to estimate values at unsampled locations. An indirect approach first interpolates individual species distributions and then determines indices based on the stacked distribution maps. We compared the appropriateness of both approaches to provide management-relevant information by mapping the distribution of demersal fish biodiversity in the German North Sea Exclusive Economic Zone using species richness, Hill's N-1 and a novel traits-based community sensitivity to fishing index (CSI). To substitute zero-inflated species with up to 95% zeros in the sample data, we applied each species' mean abundance value as a flat surface. Spatial patterns between indicators varied, but certain hot-and cold-spots were revealed, which, under current legislation, might suggest that the present level of biodiversity protection is insufficient. Despite both approaches generating similar main patterns, the direct approach predicted a narrower range of index values and only depicted the most dominant patterns. Contrary to that the indirect approach better reproduced the variability in the data, along with additional information on species distributions and a theoretical advantage pertaining to sampling issues. Although the choice over the mapping approach is context dependent, for our study area featuring a community with relatively few species, we consider the indirect approach to provide the more reliable information for implementing marine environmental legislation.
RI Mollmann, Christian/C-4788-2011
OI Mollmann, Christian/0000-0001-9161-6342
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1054-3139
EI 1095-9289
PD SEP-OCT
PY 2017
VL 74
IS 8
BP 2223
EP 2238
DI 10.1093/icesjms/fsx060
SC Fisheries; Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000412707000016
ER

PT J
AU Koyabu, D
   Hosojima, M
   Endo, H
AF Koyabu, Daisuke
   Hosojima, Misato
   Endo, Hideki
TI Into the dark: patterns of middle ear adaptations in subterranean
   eulipotyphlan mammals
SO ROYAL SOCIETY OPEN SCIENCE
DT Article
DE fossoriality; moles; geometric morphometrics; impedance matching;
   low-frequency sound
ID FUNCTIONAL-MORPHOLOGY; PHYLOGENETIC-RELATIONSHIPS; TALPA-EUROPAEA;
   INNER-EAR; GEOMETRIC MORPHOMETRICS; MOLECULAR PHYLOGENETICS; SHREWS
   INSECTIVORA; SPALAX-EHRENBERGI; SORICINE SHREWS; MOLES MAMMALIA
AB Evolution of the middle ear ossicles was a key innovation for mammals, enhancing the transmission of airborne sound. Radiation into various habitats from a terrestrial environment resulted in diversification of the auditory mechanisms among mammals. However, due to the paucity of phylogenetically controlled investigations, how middle ear traits have diversified with functional specialization remains unclear. In order to identify the respective patterns for various lifestyles and to gain insights into fossil forms, we employed a high-resolution tomography technique and compared the middle ear morphology of eulipotyphlan species (moles, shrews and hedgehogs), a group that has radiated into various environments, such as terrestrial, aquatic and subterranean habitats. Three-dimensional geometric morphometric analysis was conducted within a phylogenetically controlled framework. Quantitative shapes were found to strongly reflect the degree of subterranean lifestyle and weakly involve phylogeny. Our analyses demonstrate that subterranean adaptation should include a relatively shorter anterior process of the malleus, an enlarged incus, an enlarged stapes footplate and a reduction of the orbicular apophysis. These traits arguably allow improving low-frequency sound transmission at low frequencies and inhibiting the low-frequency noise which disturbs the subterranean animals in hearing airborne sounds.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 2054-5703
PD SEP
PY 2017
VL 4
IS 9
AR 170608
DI 10.1098/rsos.170608
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000412168900036
PM 28989763
ER

PT J
AU Zhang, SJ
   Yue, X
   Jiang, FJ
   Wang, HX
   Liu, BZ
AF Zhang, Shujing
   Yue, Xin
   Jiang, Fengjuan
   Wang, Hongxia
   Liu, Baozhong
TI Identification of an MITF gene and its polymorphisms associated with the
   Vibrio resistance trait in the clam Meretrix petechialis
SO FISH & SHELLFISH IMMUNOLOGY
DT Article
DE Meretrix petechialis; MITF; SNP; Vibrio resistance
ID TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR FAMILY; MICROPHTHALMIA LOCUS; MAST-CELLS;
   EXPRESSION; GROWTH; MECHANISMS; SURVIVAL; PARAHAEMOLYTICUS;
   DIFFERENTIATION; CHALLENGE
AB Microphthalmia-associated transcription factor (MITF) regulates the transcription of its target genes by binding to their promoters. In this study, an MITF gene, MpMITF was identified in the clam Meretrix petechialis. The full-length cDNA of MpMITF is 3564 bp with an ORF of 1365 bp. The deduced amino acid sequence consists of a conserved functional structure of bHLH-LZ, which could bind with E-box. The mRNA and protein expression levels of MpMITF were significantly up-regulated 6 h post-Vibrio injection. The mRNA expression of MpMlTF increased on day 2 and peaked on day 10 post-Vibrio immersion. Furthermore, MpMITF expression was significantly up-regulated in most resistant families of clams (P < 0.05) but did not change significantly in most susceptive families of clams after the Vibrio immersion challenge. These results suggest that, in clams, MpMITF participates in the immune response against a Vibrio infection. Genotyping in two clam groups with different resistant levels to Vibrio parahaemolyticus (i.e., 11-R and 11-S), thirteen SNPs and five haplotypes were detected in the DNA sequence of MpMITF, of which five SNPs and two haplotypes were associated with Vibrio resistance. Four SNPs (SNP2, 5, 6 and 13) and one haplotype (Hap1) were further confirmed to be associated with Vibrio resistance in M. petechialis by association analysis in different clam families. This study deepens the understanding of MITF in marine bivalves and provides potential candidate markers for resistance selection in the clam M. petechialis. (C) 2017 Elsevier Ltd, All rights reserved.
OI Liu, Baozhong/0000-0002-6090-4867
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 1050-4648
EI 1095-9947
PD SEP
PY 2017
VL 68
BP 466
EP 473
DI 10.1016/j.fsi.2017.07.035
SC Fisheries; Immunology; Marine & Freshwater Biology; Veterinary Sciences
UT WOS:000411299500051
PM 28734968
ER

PT J
AU Rolo, V
   Olivier, PI
   van Aarde, R
AF Rolo, Victor
   Olivier, Pieter I.
   van Aarde, Rudolph
TI Tree and bird functional groups as indicators of recovery of
   regenerating subtropical coastal dune forests
SO RESTORATION ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE bird guilds; functional diversity; functional redundancy; monitoring;
   plant-animal links
ID RESTORATION SUCCESS; RAIN-FOREST; RESPONSE DIVERSITY; SPECIES RICHNESS;
   RESILIENCE; TRAITS; PLANT; GROWTH; BIODIVERSITY; ECOSYSTEMS
AB Functional diversity indicators are increasingly used to monitor forest function recovery because they connect biodiversity to ecosystem functions. However, identifying which functions deviate from a reference forest has not received much attention, despite its potential to inform restoration interventions. In this study, we used functional groups to assess the recovery of ecosystem functions in regenerating coastal dune forests. We surveyed birds and trees in forest of different ages and a reference old-growth forest in KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa. We classified species into functional groups for each taxa based on functional traits or a priori defined categories (i.e. guilds) and quantified the number of species within functional groups as a proxy of function stability. Bird species density followed an asymptotic trajectory, reaching old-growth forest values after 25 years. Insectivores and granivores showed saturating trajectories, whereas small frugivores and generalists increased linearly. With the exception of large frugivores, relative abundances of bird functional groups progressed towards old-growth forest values as the forest aged. Tree species density increased linearly with forest age. In contrast to old-growth forests, large-canopy trees and understory shrubs were under-represented, while mid-canopy trees dominated regenerating forests. Our result suggests that most bird, but not tree, functions may have been restored. The trend in large frugivore numbers may warrant further investigation, as their low numbers may have hampered the recovery of tree functions. We conclude that functional group trajectories can track functions that deviate from a benchmark, and may therefore direct adaptive actions to recover the stability of regenerating forest.
RI Rolo, Victor/H-1713-2016
OI Rolo, Victor/0000-0001-5854-9512
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 1061-2971
EI 1526-100X
PD SEP
PY 2017
VL 25
IS 5
BP 788
EP 797
DI 10.1111/rec.12501
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000411686900015
ER

PT J
AU Shiflett, SA
   Zinnert, JC
   Young, DR
AF Shiflett, Sheri A.
   Zinnert, Julie C.
   Young, Donald R.
TI Functional traits of expanding, thicket-forming shrubs: contrasting
   strategies between exotic and native species
SO ECOSPHERE
DT Article
DE electron transport rate; functional traits; hydraulic conductivity;
   nitrogen fixation; thicket formation; woody expansion
ID LEAF CONSTRUCTION COST; BARRIER-ISLAND; CHLOROPHYLL FLUORESCENCE;
   PHOTOSYNTHETIC CAPACITY; HYDRAULIC CONSTRAINTS; ECOSYSTEM PROCESSES;
   TEMPORAL DYNAMICS; COASTAL LANDSCAPE; MYRICA-CERIFERA; MESIC GRASSLAND
AB Woody expansion has been documented for decades in many different systems globally, often yielding vast changes in ecosystem functioning. While causes and consequences of woody expansion have been well documented, few studies have addressed plant functional traits that promote dramatic and rapid expansion in range. Our objectives were to investigate plant functional traits that contribute to the colonization, rapid expansion, and thicket formation of an invasive, N-fixing shrub, Elaeagnus umbellata Thunb. (Elaeagnaceae), and a native, N-fixing shrub Morella cerifera (L.) Small (Myricaceae) and compare to native, sympatric, non-expanding shrub species. Quantified functional traits included morphological (e.g., specific leaf area, leaf area) and physiological characteristics (e.g., electron transport rate, hydraulic conductivity) and were linked to two primary resources: light and water, which directly influence plant growth. Elaeagnus umbellata and M.cerifera rely on different strategies to maximize carbon gain, yet resulting physiological efficiency is similar. Elaeagnus umbellata invests a substantial amount of energy into growth during a short amount of time (i.e., deciduous growing season), using an acquisitive trait strategy to outcompete cooccurring woody species, while M. cerifera is productive year-round and uses a combination of conservative and acquisitive traits to outcompete co-occurring woody species. The majority of quantified functional traits of E. umbellata and several of M. cerifera are indicative of efficient light capture, utilization, and internal water movement. These factors contribute to rapid range expansion and thicket formation by promoting enhanced productivity while simultaneously inhibiting colonization and expansion of co-occurring species. Suites of functional traits are important for expansive success and thicket formation, yet differences in functional traits represent alternative strategies for colonization, rapid expansion, and thicketization.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 2150-8925
PD SEP
PY 2017
VL 8
IS 9
AR e01918
DI 10.1002/ecs2.1918
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000410627100004
ER

PT J
AU Sciberras, M
   Tait, K
   Brochain, G
   Hiddink, JG
   Hale, R
   Godbold, JA
   Solan, M
AF Sciberras, Marija
   Tait, Karen
   Brochain, Guillaume
   Hiddink, Jan G.
   Hale, Rachel
   Godbold, Jasmin A.
   Solan, Martin
TI Mediation of nitrogen by post-disturbance shelf communities experiencing
   organic matter enrichment
SO BIOGEOCHEMISTRY
DT Article
DE Ammonia-oxidisers; Bioturbation; Bottom fishing; Denitrification;
   Ecosystem functioning; Microbial-invertebrate interactions; Nitrogen
   cycling
ID SOUTHERN NORTH-SEA; SEDIMENT CHEMISTRY; BIOGEOCHEMICAL PROCESSES;
   BACTERIAL COMMUNITIES; MICROBIAL COMMUNITIES; BENTHIC COMMUNITY; TRAWL
   DISTURBANCE; COASTAL SEDIMENTS; MARINE SEDIMENT; GLOBAL ANALYSIS
AB Microbes and benthic macro-invertebrates interact in sediments to play a major role in the biogeochemical cycling of organic matter, but the extent to which their contributions are modified following natural and anthropogenic changes has received little attention. Here, we investigate how nitrogen transformations, ascertained from changes in archaeal and bacterial N-cycling microbes and water macronutrient concentrations ([NH4-N], [NO2-N], [NO3-N]), in sand and sandy mud sediments differ when macrofaunal communities that have previously experienced contrasting levels of chronic fishing disturbance are exposed to organic matter enrichment. We find that differences in macrofaunal community structure related to differences in fishing activity affect the capacity of the macrofauna to mediate microbial nitrogen cycling in sand, but not in sandy mud environments. Whilst we found no evidence for a change in ammonia oxidiser community structure, we did find an increase in archaeal and bacterial denitrifier (AnirKa, nirS) and anammox (hzo) transcripts in macrofaunal communities characterized by higher ratios of suspension to deposit feeders, and a lower density but higher biomass of sediment-reworking fauna. Our findings suggest that nitrogen transformation in shelf sandy sediments is dependent on the stimulation of specific nitrogen cycling pathways that are associated with differences in the composition and context-dependent expression of the functional traits that belong to the resident bioturbating macrofauna community.
RI Hiddink, Jan Geert/C-1238-2009
OI Hiddink, Jan Geert/0000-0001-7114-830X; Solan,
   Martin/0000-0001-9924-5574; Hale, Rachel/0000-0001-5079-5954
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0168-2563
EI 1573-515X
PD SEP
PY 2017
VL 135
IS 1-2
BP 135
EP 153
DI 10.1007/s10533-017-0370-5
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Geology
UT WOS:000410456400008
ER

PT J
AU Thiebaut, G
   Boiche, A
   Lemoine, D
   Barrat-Segretain, MH
AF Thiebaut, Gabrielle
   Boiche, Anatole
   Lemoine, Damien
   Barrat-Segretain, Marie-Helene
TI Trade-offs between growth and defence in two phylogenetically close
   invasive species
SO AQUATIC ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE Resistance; Herbivores; Aquatic plants; Functional traits; Elodea
   species
ID FRESH-WATER MACROPHYTES; INCREASED COMPETITIVE ABILITY;
   ELODEA-CANADENSIS MICHAUX; ST-JOHN; PLANT PALATABILITY; CHEMICAL
   DEFENSES; HERBIVORY; POPULATIONS; STRATEGIES; RESISTANCE
AB The success of an invasive plant species could be explained by trade-off between growth and defence. The aim of this paper was to explore the responses of two non-native aquatic macrophytes Elodea canadensis and Elodea nuttallii to herbivores in their introduced range. We assessed the palatability of the two phylogenetically close aquatic plant species in field and their responses to gammarid consumption in spring, summer and autumn in a microcosm experiment. We measured the variation of functional traits for each season. The traits selected were those judged most closely related to the allocation of resources to growth or to resistance against herbivores. We clearly established that the strategies of the two species were different and that their consumption rate differed in summer. In summer, E. canadensis allocated more of its resources to structural defence (leaf toughness). The increase in leaf thickness reduced the palatability of E. canadensis, whereas E. nuttallii stimulated its growth. Moreover, a decrease in dry matter content in E. nuttallii was found during the growing season in field. In autumn, both plant species accumulated nitrogen and phosphorus in their tissues. We also demonstrated that neither species induced efficient chemical defences against the herbivores. The different strategies of these two Elodea species could be explained by their different resident times in the introduced area and by an adaptation of the naturalised E. canadensis to herbivores.
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 1386-2588
EI 1573-5125
PD SEP
PY 2017
VL 51
IS 3
BP 405
EP 415
DI 10.1007/s10452-017-9625-4
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000408340600006
ER

PT J
AU Vilenica, M
   Ivkovic, M
   Sartori, M
   Mihaljevic, Z
AF Vilenica, Marina
   Ivkovic, Marija
   Sartori, Michel
   Mihaljevic, Zlatko
TI Mayfly emergence along an oligotrophic Dinaric karst hydrosystem:
   spatial and temporal patterns, and species-environment relationship
SO AQUATIC ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE Mayflies; Karst; Phenology; Microhabitats; Longitudinal distribution;
   Abiotic factors
ID STREAM INSECT EMERGENCE; TRAIT-BASED APPROACH; AQUATIC INSECTS;
   CLIMATE-CHANGE; CURRENT VELOCITY; EPHEMERA-DANICA; LIFE-CYCLE;
   TRICHOPTERA; WATER; RIVER
AB Mayfly emergence was studied in the Plitvice Lakes National Park (Croatia) monthly over a 2-year period in four habitats (springs, streams, mountainous rivers, tufa barriers) using monthly collections of emergence traps. A total of 12 mayfly taxa were recorded. Almost half of the collected specimens belonged to the genus Baetis Leach, 1815, which was recorded at every site, but we were unable to distinguish between two included species (B. rhodani and B. cf. nubecularis). Other abundant species were Centroptilum luteolum (Muller, 1776), Alainites muticus (Linnaeus, 1758), Habrophlebia lauta Eaton 1884, Paraleptophlebia submarginata (Stephens, 1835), Serratella ignita (Poda, 1761), Ephemera danica Muller, 1764 and Rhithrogena braaschi Jacob, 1974. The mayfly assemblages at all sites were dominated by species typical of the rhithral zone, but there was a shift in species composition along a longitudinal gradient (from 720 to 390 m a.s.l.) from dominance of eucrenal-epirhithral to metarhithral-hyporhithral elements and finally to appearance of metapotamal and littoral elements. Two environmental factors, maximum water temperature and mean pH, had the highest influence on the mayfly assemblages. Emergence mainly occurred between March and November and was related to the elevated water temperature. Emergence patterns of some species were in accordance with their typical Central European emergence patterns (e.g. S. ignita, H. lauta) while some others showed certain discrepancies (e.g. longer emergence period in Rh. braaschi and P. submarginata, one generation emergence in A. muticus and variable emergence patterns between the sites and between the two studied years in C. luteolum). The current study provides a significant contribution to the knowledge of mayfly ecology in karst freshwater habitats which forms a basis for further investigation and monitoring of mayflies in this area.
OI Ivkovic, Marija/0000-0003-3188-5676; Sartori, Michel/0000-0003-3397-3397
TC 4
Z9 5
SN 1386-2588
EI 1573-5125
PD SEP
PY 2017
VL 51
IS 3
BP 417
EP 433
DI 10.1007/s10452-017-9626-3
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000408340600007
ER

PT J
AU Hidalgo, M
   Quetglas, A
   Ordines, F
   Rueda, L
   Punzon, A
   Delgado, M
   de Sola, LG
   Esteban, A
   Massuti, E
AF Hidalgo, Manuel
   Quetglas, Antoni
   Ordines, Francesc
   Rueda, Lucia
   Punzon, Antonio
   Delgado, Marina
   Gil de Sola, Luis
   Esteban, Antonio
   Massuti, Enric
TI Size-spectra across geographical and bathymetric gradients reveal
   contrasting resilient mechanisms of recovery between Atlantic and
   Mediterranean fish communities
SO JOURNAL OF BIOGEOGRAPHY
DT Article
DE Atlantic Ocean; community resilience; fish communities; Mediterranean
   Sea; rescue effect; size-spectra; spatial heterogeneity
ID NORTHEAST ATLANTIC; BALEARIC-ISLANDS; MARINE FISHES; FOOD WEBS;
   BODY-SIZE; INDICATORS; SEA; STABILITY; ABUNDANCE; ASSEMBLAGES
AB Aim Marine conservation often prioritizes measures based on ecosystem diversity, missing important information on the size and structure of communities such as that provided by body size-spectra (SS). While most studies have focussed on temporal or spatial patterns of SS, there is no research investigating their spatial heterogeneity, which is a key community trait revealing mechanisms of resilience. We aimed to comparatively determine the main patterns of variation of fish SS and their spatial heterogeneity across geographic and bathymetric gradients.
   Location Shelf and slope Atlantic and Mediterranean demersal ecosystems.
   Methods Using the information obtained from the experimental surveys, we calculated fish SS at four bathymetric strata and investigated the influence of the biomass of small-sized and large-sized fish on their temporal and spatial variation. We also assessed the functional relationship between the mean pattern and the spatial heterogeneity of SS as a characteristic structural trait of a community.
   Results The variation in SS demonstrates that Atlantic communities were geographically and bathymetrically more connected, while those in the Mediterranean were more fragmented. The relationship between mean SS and its spatial heterogeneity was a community fingerprint differentiating two contrasting pathways of community recovery between Atlantic and Mediterranean ecosystems. Atlantic communities were recovering because of the temporal increasing contribution of large fish and a 'rescue effect' of neighbouring areas, which have spatially homogenized size structure. Mediterranean communities were, by contrast, spatially clustered and highly dependent on small-sized fish variability that hampers the capacity of ecosystems to recover after a chronic degradation.
   Main conclusions Patterns of SS variation depend on the spatial complexity of communities, which contrasts between Atlantic and Mediterranean systems. Integrative analyses of size-based indicators (mean and variance) provide a complete assessment of the structural properties of communities and characterize the resilience mechanisms of recovery against perturbations under contrasting ecological contexts.
OI Hidalgo, Manuel/0000-0002-3494-9658; Ordines, F.
   (Francesc)/0000-0002-2456-2214; Gil de Sola, Luis/0000-0003-1987-9716;
   Massuti, Enric/0000-0002-9524-5873
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0305-0270
EI 1365-2699
PD SEP
PY 2017
VL 44
IS 9
BP 1939
EP 1951
DI 10.1111/jbi.12976
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Physical Geography
UT WOS:000408209700003
ER

PT J
AU Labarre, D
   Charruau, P
   Platt, SG
   Rainwater, TR
   Cedeno-Vazquez, JR
   Gonzalez-Cortes, H
AF Labarre, Didier
   Charruau, P.
   Platt, S. G.
   Rainwater, T. R.
   Cedeno-Vazquez, J. R.
   Gonzalez-Cortes, H.
TI Morphological diversity of the American crocodile (Crocodylus acutus) in
   the Yucatan Peninsula
SO ZOOMORPHOLOGY
DT Article
DE American crocodile; Insular populations; Morphological functional
   response; Size estimation; Sexual dimorphism
ID SEXUAL SIZE DIMORPHISM; MECHANICAL PERFORMANCE; MORPHOMETRIC ANALYSIS;
   ADAPTIVE RADIATION; QUINTANA-ROO; COASTAL ZONE; BELIZE; MORELETII;
   MEXICO; HYBRIDIZATION
AB Recent evidence suggests that morphological divergence of the American crocodile (Crocodylus acutus) occurred in Greater Antilles under conditions of prolonged isolation and hybridization with the Cuban crocodile (C. rhombifer). We investigated morphological diversity in C. acutus in the coastal zone of the Yucatan Peninsula, where isolation and hybridization have also been reported. We compared the relationships among various morphological traits between insular and coastal populations. Our results suggest morphological diversity in the region, which is possibly related to population isolation and mechanical constraints imposed by differences in diet. A broad-snouted morphotype appears typical of island populations. Hybridization could also cause morphological variation, but its importance in this case remains to be confirmed. Sexual dimorphism of the American crocodile in the region appears to be less pronounced than for other crocodilians. We also provide population-specific size estimation models for two populations (Banco Chinchorro and Cozumel) to improve future monitoring.
RI Cedeno-Vazquez, Jose/G-5987-2014
OI Cedeno-Vazquez, Jose/0000-0001-7763-902X
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0720-213X
EI 1432-234X
PD SEP
PY 2017
VL 136
IS 3
BP 387
EP 401
DI 10.1007/s00435-017-0356-9
SC Anatomy & Morphology; Zoology
UT WOS:000408081800009
ER

PT J
AU Niedrist, G
   Fureder, L
AF Niedrist, Georg
   Fuereder, Leopold
TI Trophic ecology of alpine stream invertebrates: current status and
   future research needs
SO FRESHWATER SCIENCE
DT Article
DE functional feeding groups; functional ecology; food preference; food
   sources; stable isotope mixing modeling
ID FOOD-WEB; INTRAGUILD PREDATION; FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; COMMUNITY
   STRUCTURE; SHRINKING GLACIERS; CHIRONOMID DIPTERA; AQUATIC INSECTS;
   ORGANIC-MATTER; CLIMATE-CHANGE; RIVER SYSTEMS
AB Community structures of benthic invertebrates in different alpine stream types have been well documented and modeled against environmental conditions and change. However, community structure cannot be linked directly to community functions or processes, and this problem prevents clear estimation of functional consequences of environmental changes. In this article, we highlight the need to focus research efforts on the trophic ecology of alpine streams for several reasons. 1) The trophic ecology of invertebrates is remarkably understudied in the field of alpine stream ecology (only 7% of published studies), but the trophic ecology of invertebrates underlies crucial functions in these ecosystems. 2) Classifications of species into functional feeding groups, traits often used to express the functionality of invertebrate communities, are missing for several alpine species or have been deduced from classifications based on higher taxonomic levels. 3) Most investigators focused on a few trophic levels, whereas use of new analytical methods, such as Bayesian stable-isotope mixing models could provide statistically sophisticated estimations of multiple food-source contributions to consumers' diets. 4) Out-dated ideas need to be revised; e.g., we demonstrate that Diamesa species can actively select their food, which is against the established assumption that animals in harsh environments are forced to feed on everything they can get. Based on literature studies, we summarized most critical research needs on the trophic ecology of alpine stream invertebrates. Our goal is to promote ways to understand the ecological function of alpine stream invertebrates and the potential effects of alteration of their trophic relationships by ongoing environmental changes like glacier retreat, water exploitation, or immigration of invasive species.
OI NIedrist, Georg/0000-0002-2852-4661
TC 4
Z9 5
SN 2161-9549
EI 2161-9565
PD SEP
PY 2017
VL 36
IS 3
BP 466
EP 478
DI 10.1086/692831
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000407373600002
ER

PT J
AU Westveer, JJ
   Verdonschot, PFM
   Verdonschot, RCM
AF Westveer, Judith J.
   Verdonschot, Piet F. M.
   Verdonschot, Ralf C. M.
TI Substrate homogenization affects survival and fitness in the lowland
   stream caddisflies Micropterna sequax and Potamophylax rotundipennis: a
   mesocosm experiment
SO FRESHWATER SCIENCE
DT Article
DE habitat heterogeneity; substrate patchiness; habitat preference;
   Trichoptera; macroinvertebrates; functional traits
ID TRICHOPTERA; DISPERSAL; INVERTEBRATES; DISTURBANCE; RESILIENCE;
   RESISTANCE; HABITAT; FLOW; COMMUNITY; LARVAE
AB Loss of substrate heterogeneity or patchiness is common in lowland streams with disturbed hydrological regimes. At the reach scale, peak discharges tend to homogenize the stream bed and decrease the availability of specific microhabitat types. This spatial shift in habitats toward a more homogeneous landscape could have large negative effects on species that perform essential ecosystem processes. We conducted an aquatic mesocosm experiment to test the effect of habitat homogenization on survival and fitness of 2 species of Trichoptera (Micropterna sequax and Potamophylax rotundipennis). We used caddisflies as model organisms because of their abundance in lowland streams, their representativeness of the total shredder community, and their important role in leaf-litter decomposition. We reared larvae in artificial recirculating channels containing leaf and sand patches in 3 spatial configurations, differing in homogeneity of substrates, varying from few large patches to many small patches. We used emergence rate as a measure of survival and biomass and wing span of the adults as fitness correlates. For M. sequax, survival was lower in the homogeneous than in the heterogeneous configurations, but patch configuration did not affect fitness. For P. rotundipennis, spatial configuration of the patches did not affect survival, but the longest forewings for both males and females were found in the homogeneous configuration. Our results suggest that both species experience intraspecific resource competition arising from the spatial distribution of patches, expressed as an investment in wing development (e.g., dispersal capacity) in P. rotundipennis and resulting in lower survival rates in M. sequax. Our results indicate the importance of knowledge of trait-based responses and highlight the effects of the configuration of stream bottom substrate for its inhabitants on microscale.
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 2161-9549
EI 2161-9565
PD SEP
PY 2017
VL 36
IS 3
BP 585
EP 594
DI 10.1086/692940
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000407373600011
ER

PT J
AU Biswas, SR
   Vogt, RJ
   Sharma, S
AF Biswas, Shekhar R.
   Vogt, Richard J.
   Sharma, Sapna
TI Projected compositional shifts and loss of ecosystem services in
   freshwater fish communities under climate change scenarios
SO HYDROBIOLOGIA
DT Article
DE Compositional shift; Ecosystem services; Species distribution models;
   Trait analysis
ID FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; CHANGE IMPACTS; BIODIVERSITY LOSS; SPECIES
   RICHNESS; SMALLMOUTH BASS; DISTRIBUTION MODELS; POTENTIAL IMPACTS;
   THERMAL HABITAT; ASSEMBLAGES; LAKES
AB What are the projected impacts of climate change on community composition and consequentially on the distribution of functional traits? Answers to these questions are somewhat unclear but critical for designing ecological management strategies. Here we forecast potential impacts of climate change on freshwater lake fish communities of Ontario, Canada, by contrasting species composition, species richness, functional diversity and functional composition for present versus projected communities under "best-case" and "business-as-usual" climate change scenarios. Results indicate that the composition of projected communities differs from present, and includes a shift from cold- and cool-water species to warm-water species. Species richness in projected communities is estimated to increase by 60-81%, but functional diversity is estimated to decline. These projected communities are estimated to have on average 22% shorter mean body length, 38% lighter body weight and 36% less fecundity than present. Also, the present configuration of sport and commercially important fishes are projected to decline in their distribution, potentially impacting ecosystem services associated with commercial and recreational fisheries. Together, climate change may initiate a compositional shift that may result in an important shift in community functional structure, which is likely to affect important aquatic ecosystem services.
OI Sharma, Sapna/0000-0003-4571-2768; Biswas, Shekhar/0000-0001-9203-2488
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 0018-8158
EI 1573-5117
PD SEP
PY 2017
VL 799
IS 1
BP 135
EP 149
DI 10.1007/s10750-017-3208-1
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000405720000010
ER

PT J
AU Nielsen, LT
   Asadzadeh, SS
   Dolger, J
   Walther, JH
   Kiorboe, T
   Andersen, A
AF Nielsen, Lasse Tor
   Asadzadeh, Seyed Saeed
   Dolger, Julia
   Walther, Jens H.
   Kiorboe, Thomas
   Andersen, Anders
TI Hydrodynamics of microbial filter feeding
SO PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES OF THE UNITED STATES OF
   AMERICA
DT Article
DE protozoans; choanoflagellates; filter feeding; microswimmers;
   computational fluid dynamics
ID CODOSIGA-BOTRYTIS; CHOANOFLAGELLATE; CYLINDERS; APPARATUS; PORIFERA;
   FLOW
AB Microbial filter feeders are an important group of grazers, significant to the microbial loop, aquatic food webs, and biogeochemical cycling. Our understanding of microbial filter feeding is poor, and, importantly, it is unknown what force microbial filter feeders must generate to process adequate amounts of water. Also, the trade-off in the filter spacing remains unexplored, despite its simple formulation: A filter too coarse will allow suitably sized prey to pass unintercepted, whereas a filter too fine will cause strong flow resistance. We quantify the feeding flow of the filter-feeding choanoflagellate Diaphanoeca grandis using particle tracking, and demonstrate that the current understanding of microbial filter feeding is inconsistent with computational fluid dynamics (CFD) and analytical estimates. Both approaches underestimate observed filtration rates by more than an order of magnitude; the beating flagellum is simply unable to draw enough water through the fine filter. We find similar discrepancies for other choanoflagellate species, highlighting an apparent paradox. Our observations motivate us to suggest a radically different filtration mechanism that requires a flagellar vane (sheet), something notoriously difficult to visualize but sporadically observed in the related choanocytes (sponges). A CFD model with a flagellar vane correctly predicts the filtration rate of D. grandis, and using a simple model we can account for the filtration rates of other microbial filter feeders. We finally predict how optimum filter mesh size increases with cell size in microbial filter feeders, a prediction that accords very well with observations. We expect our results to be of significance for small-scale biophysics and trait-based ecological modeling.
RI Walther, Jens/D-9549-2015; Andersen, Anders/A-5741-2011; Dolger,
   Julia/H-9336-2018
OI Walther, Jens/0000-0001-8100-9178; Andersen, Anders/0000-0002-3831-1707;
   Dolger, Julia/0000-0003-4667-4716; Asadzadeh, Seyed
   Saeed/0000-0002-6360-8924; Nielsen, Lasse Tor/0000-0003-4177-3205
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 0027-8424
PD AUG 29
PY 2017
VL 114
IS 35
BP 9373
EP 9378
DI 10.1073/pnas.1708873114
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000408536000049
PM 28808016
ER

PT J
AU Konow, N
   Price, S
   Abom, R
   Bellwood, D
   Wainwright, P
AF Konow, Nicolai
   Price, Samantha
   Abom, Richard
   Bellwood, David
   Wainwright, Peter
TI Decoupled diversification dynamics of feeding morphology following a
   major functional innovation in marine butterflyfishes
SO PROCEEDINGS OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY B-BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES
DT Article
DE functional disparity; biting feeding mode; design breakthrough;
   ecological threshold; key innovation; Chaetodontidae
ID CORAL-REEF FISHES; PREY-CAPTURE; PRINCIPAL-COMPONENTS; EVOLUTION;
   CHAETODONTIDAE; DIVERSITY; JAWS; POMACANTHIDAE; ANGELFISHES; PERCIFORMES
AB The diversity of fishes on coral reefs is influenced by the evolution of feeding innovations. For instance, the evolution of an intramandibular jaw joint has aided shifts to corallivory in Chaetodon butterflyfishes following their Miocene colonization of coral reefs. Today, over half of all Chaetodon species consume coral, easily the largest concentration of corallivores in any reef fish family. In contrast with Chaetodon, other chaetodontids, including the long-jawed bannerfishes, remain less intimately associated with coral and mainly consume other invertebrate prey. Here, we test (i) if intramandibular joint (IMJ) evolution in Chaetodon has accelerated feeding morphological diversification, and (ii) if cranial and post-cranial traits were affected similarly. We measured 19 cranial functional morphological traits, gut length and body elongation for 33 Indo-Pacific species. Comparisons of Brownian motion rate parameters revealed that cranial diversification was about four times slower in Chaetodon butterflyfishes with the IMJ than in other chaetodontids. However, the rate of gut length evolution was significantly faster in Chaetodon, with no group-differences for body elongation. The contrasting patterns of cranial and post-cranial morphological evolution stress the importance of comprehensive datasets in ecomorphology. The IMJ appears to enhance coral feeding ability in Chaetodon and represents a design breakthrough that facilitates this trophic strategy. Meanwhile, variation in gut anatomy probably reflects diversity in how coral tissues are procured and assimilated. Bannerfishes, by contrast, retain a relatively unspecialized gut for processing invertebrate prey, but have evolved some of the most extreme cranial mechanical innovations among bony fishes for procuring elusive prey.
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0962-8452
EI 1471-2954
PD AUG 16
PY 2017
VL 284
IS 1860
AR 2017.0906
DI 10.1098/rspb.2017.0906
SC Life Sciences & Biomedicine - Other Topics; Environmental Sciences &
   Ecology; Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000407805000020
PM 28768889
ER

PT J
AU Nawrot, R
   Albano, PG
   Chattopadhyay, D
   Zuschin, M
AF Nawrot, Rafal
   Albano, Paolo G.
   Chattopadhyay, Devapriya
   Zuschin, Martin
TI Climate change and body size shift in Mediterranean bivalve assemblages:
   unexpected role of biological invasions
SO PROCEEDINGS OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY B-BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES
DT Article
DE alien species; body size; Lessepsian invasion; marine bivalves;
   tropicalization
ID MARINE BIVALVES; RED-SEA; PATTERNS; SUCCESS; RANGE; ESTABLISHMENT;
   POPULATIONS; FRAMEWORK; ECOSYSTEM; HISTORY
AB Body size is a synthetic functional trait determining many key ecosystem properties. Reduction in average body size has been suggested as one of the universal responses to global warming in aquatic ecosystems. Climate change, however, coincides with human-enhanced dispersal of alien species and can facilitate their establishment. We address effects of species introductions on the size structure of recipient communities using data on Red Sea bivalves entering the Mediterranean Sea through the Suez Canal. We show that the invasion leads to increase in median body size of the Mediterranean assemblage. Alien species are significantly larger than native Mediterranean bivalves, even though they represent a random subset of the Red Sea species with respect to body size. The observed patterns result primarily from the differences in the taxonomic composition and body-size distributions of the source and recipient species pools. In contrast to the expectations based on the general temperature-size relationships in marine ectotherms, continued warming of the Mediterranean Sea indirectly leads to an increase in the proportion of large-bodied species in bivalve assemblages by accelerating the entry and spread of tropical aliens. These results underscore complex interactions between changing climate and species invasions in driving functional shifts in marine ecosystems.
RI Zuschin, Martin/M-9951-2016; Albano, Paolo/E-6128-2012
OI Zuschin, Martin/0000-0002-5235-0198; Albano, Paolo/0000-0001-9876-1024;
   Nawrot, Rafal/0000-0002-5774-7311
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0962-8452
EI 1471-2954
PD AUG 16
PY 2017
VL 284
IS 1860
AR 20170357
DI 10.1098/rspb.2017.0357
SC Life Sciences & Biomedicine - Other Topics; Environmental Sciences &
   Ecology; Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000407805000002
PM 28768884
ER

PT J
AU Xu, GJ
   Yang, EJ
   Xu, HL
AF Xu, Guangjian
   Yang, Eun Jin
   Xu, Henglong
TI Environmental drivers of heterogeneity in the trophic-functional
   structure of protozoan communities during an annual cycle in a coastal
   ecosystem
SO MARINE POLLUTION BULLETIN
DT Article
DE Trophic-functional structure; Periphytic protozoa; Water quality;
   Bioassessment; Coastal ecosystems
ID DWELLING CILIATE COMMUNITIES; PROTIST COMMUNITIES; QUALITY STATUS;
   WATER-QUALITY; RESPONSES; ENRICHMENT; DYNAMICS
AB Trophic-functional groupings are an important biological trait to summarize community structure in functional space. The heterogeneity of the tropic-functional pattern of protozoan communities and its environmental drivers were studied in coastal waters of the Yellow Sea during a 1-year cycle. Samples were collected using the glass slide method at four stations within a water pollution gradient. A second-stage matrix-based analysis was used to summarize spatial variation in the annual pattern of the functional structure. A clustering analysis revealed significant variability in the trophic-functional pattern among the four stations during the 1-year cycle. The heterogeneity in the trophic-functional pattern of the communities was significantly related to changes in environmental variables, particularly ammonium-nitrogen and nitrates, alone or in combination with dissolved oxygen. These results suggest that the heterogeneity in annual patterns of protozoan trophic-functional structure may reflect water quality status in coastal ecosystems.
TC 5
Z9 5
SN 0025-326X
EI 1879-3363
PD AUG 15
PY 2017
VL 121
IS 1-2
BP 400
EP 403
DI 10.1016/j.marpolbul.2017.06.012
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000407529200056
PM 28624358
ER

PT J
AU Mutshinda, CM
   Finkel, ZV
   Widdicombe, CE
   Irwin, AJ
AF Mutshinda, Crispin M.
   Finkel, Zoe V.
   Widdicombe, Claire E.
   Irwin, Andrew J.
TI Phytoplankton traits from long-term oceanographic time-series
SO MARINE ECOLOGY PROGRESS SERIES
DT Article
DE Phytoplankton; Time series; Traits; Growth rate; Grazing rate; English
   Channel
ID GROWTH-RATES; MARINE-PHYTOPLANKTON; COMMUNITY STRUCTURE;
   LIGHT-ABSORPTION; GRAZING IMPACT; CHINA SEA; DYNAMICS; ECOSYSTEM; OCEAN;
   SIZE
AB Trait values are usually extracted from laboratory studies of single phytoplankton species, which presents challenges for understanding the immense diversity of phytoplankton species and the wide range of dynamic ocean environments. Here we use a Bayesian approach and a trait-based model to extract trait values for 4 functional types and 10 diatom species from field data collected at Station L4 in the Western Channel Observatory, English Channel. We find differences in maximum net growth rate, temperature optimum and sensitivity, half-saturation constants for light and nitrogen, and density-dependent loss terms across the functional types. We find evidence of very high linear loss rates, suggesting that grazing may be even more important than commonly assumed and differences in density-dependent loss rates across functional types, indicating the presence of strong niche differentiation among functional types. Low half-saturation constants for nitrogen at the functional type level may indicate widespread mixotrophy. At the species level, we find a wide range of density-dependent effects, which may be a signal of diversity in grazing susceptibility or biotic interactions. This approach may be a way to obtain more realistic and better-constrained trait values for functional types to be used in ecosystem modeling.
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 0171-8630
EI 1616-1599
PD AUG 3
PY 2017
VL 576
BP 11
EP 25
DI 10.3354/meps12220
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology;
   Oceanography
UT WOS:000407443900002
ER

PT J
AU Pimiento, C
   Griffin, JN
   Clements, CF
   Silvestro, D
   Varela, S
   Uhen, MD
   Jaramillo, C
AF Pimiento, Catalina
   Griffin, John N.
   Clements, Christopher F.
   Silvestro, Daniele
   Varela, Sara
   Uhen, Mark D.
   Jaramillo, Carlos
TI The Pliocene marine megafauna extinction and its impact on functional
   diversity
SO NATURE ECOLOGY & EVOLUTION
DT Article
ID SEA-LEVEL CHANGE; PERMIAN MASS EXTINCTION; BODY-SIZE; FOSSIL RECORD;
   ENVIRONMENTAL-CHANGE; ECOSYSTEM FUNCTION; CARIBBEAN NEOGENE; FAUNAL
   TURNOVER; CLIMATE-CHANGE; BIODIVERSITY
AB The end of the Pliocene marked the beginning of a period of great climatic variability and sea-level oscillations. Here, based on a new analysis of the fossil record, we identify a previously unrecognized extinction event among marine megafauna (mammals, seabirds, turtles and sharks) during this time, with extinction rates three times higher than in the rest of the Cenozoic, and with 36% of Pliocene genera failing to survive into the Pleistocene. To gauge the potential consequences of this event for ecosystem functioning, we evaluate its impacts on functional diversity, focusing on the 86% of the megafauna genera that are associated with coastal habitats. Seven (14%) coastal functional entities (unique trait combinations) disappeared, along with 17% of functional richness (volume of the functional space). The origination of new genera during the Pleistocene created new functional entities and contributed to a functional shift of 21%, but minimally compensated for the functional space lost. Reconstructions show that from the late Pliocene onwards, the global area of the neritic zone significantly diminished and exhibited amplified fluctuations. We hypothesize that the abrupt loss of productive coastal habitats, potentially acting alongside oceanographic alterations, was a key extinction driver. The importance of area loss is supported by model analyses showing that animals with high energy requirements (homeotherms) were more susceptible to extinction. The extinction event we uncover here demonstrates that marine megafauna were more vulnerable to global environmental changes in the recent geological past than previously thought.
OI Uhen, Mark/0000-0002-2689-0801; Pimiento, Catalina/0000-0002-5320-7246
TC 14
Z9 14
SN 2397-334X
PD AUG
PY 2017
VL 1
IS 8
BP 1100
EP 1106
DI 10.1038/s41559-017-0223-6
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000417188600015
PM 29046566
ER

PT J
AU Pakeman, RJ
   Hewison, RL
   Lewis, RJ
AF Pakeman, Robin J.
   Hewison, Richard L.
   Lewis, Rob J.
TI Linking functional traits and species preferences to species' abundance
   and occupancy trends through time to identify habitat changes in coastal
SO PERSPECTIVES IN PLANT ECOLOGY EVOLUTION AND SYSTEMATICS
DT Article
DE Abandonment; Eutrophication; Grazing; Machair; Sand dune; Succession
ID NITROGEN DEPOSITION; VEGETATION CHANGE; CLIMATE-CHANGE; PLANT TRAITS;
   BIOTIC HOMOGENIZATION; DUNE GRASSLAND; COMMUNITIES; NETHERLANDS;
   MANAGEMENT; FORESTS
AB Coastal habitats are rich in biodiversity and provide highly valued ecosystem services. However, they are subject to many environmental drivers that can have severe impacts on these inherently fragile ecosystems. A resurvey approach was used to assess changes in species' abundances and occupancy on sand dunes and machair in Scotland, UK to assess how this could impact on this set of habitats. These were assessed to see if increasers and decreasers shared common trait values, if trends were similar to other terrestrial habitats and if responses to environmental drivers were modulated by traits. In general, there has been a shift towards taller species with more exploitative growth forms and an increase in indicators of unfavourable habitat condition according to criteria for assessing sites designated for nature protection as part of the EU Natura 2000 network, particularly tall grasses characteristic of nutrient-rich conditions exemplified by Arrhenatherum elatius. Coastal heathlands have been particularly affected by the increase in species such as Betula spp. and Pteridium aquilinum which can dominate and exclude other heathland species. On average, increasing species were both more common nationally and increasing nationally, suggesting increasing homogenisation between sand dunes/machair and other terrestrial habitats. Changes have been faster and more negative in conservation terms in cooler, drier and more polluted sites (mainly on the east coast of Scotland) and also in sites which had seen reductions in grazing. Reinstating grazing could counteract some of the negative impacts of eutrophication, but this could prove problematic to integrate with recreational activities and the largely arable based farming systems adjacent to these sites.
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 1433-8319
PD AUG
PY 2017
VL 27
BP 35
EP 44
DI 10.1016/j.ppees.2017.06.002
SC Plant Sciences; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000412416700004
ER

PT J
AU Zhang, LX
   Ma, D
   Xu, JS
   Quan, JX
   Dang, H
   Chai, YF
   Liu, X
   Guo, YX
   Yue, M
AF Zhang, Lixia
   Ma, Di
   Xu, Jinshi
   Quan, Jiaxin
   Dang, Han
   Chai, Yongfu
   Liu, Xiao
   Guo, Yaoxin
   Yue, Ming
TI Economic trade-offs of hydrophytes and neighbouring terrestrial
   herbaceous plants based on plant functional traits
SO BASIC AND APPLIED ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE Hydrophyte; Terrestrial plant; Functional traits; Leaf economic
   spectrum; Economic strategy
ID AQUATIC PLANTS; BIOMASS ALLOCATION; LEAF; SPECTRUM; SUBMERGENCE;
   STRATEGIES; WORLDWIDE; GROWTH; MACROPHYTE; TOLERANCE
AB This study aims to compare variation and co-variation of leaf, stem and root economic traits between hydrophytes and sympatric terrestrial plants, and further to explore the ecological strategies of the aquatic plants. We collected data for 145 species from 38 sites in Shaanxi Province, including 60 aquatic species and 85 terrestrial species (112 genera and 48 families). Fifteen plant economic traits of these species were measured, including specific leaf area, dry matter content and C, N, P stoichiometry in leaves, stems and roots. Multivariate analysis was employed to uncover the differences in economic trade-offs between aquatic and terrestrial plants. The results indicated that: (1) Hydrophytes exhibited much higher specific leaf area and lower mean leaf dry matter content, stem dry matter content, root dry matter content, stem carbon content and root carbon content compared with that of terrestrial plants in order to adapt to the aquatic environment, that is, there were differences in mean traits about the economic trade-offs faced by hydrophytes and terrestrial plants. (2) The leaf economic spectrum of aquatic plants in this region coincided with the worldwide leaf economics spectrum, while hydrophytes are located at the extreme of thin leaves which is conducive to rapid acquisition of resources. (3) Aquatic and terrestrial species can be discriminated by few functional traits related to resource acquisition and support tissues. (4) Aquatic and terrestrial plants differed in bivariate correlations between certain economic traits (standardized major axis analysis), indicating differences in plant strategies. (C) 2017 Gesellschaft fur Okologie. Published by Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1439-1791
EI 1618-0089
PD AUG
PY 2017
VL 22
BP 11
EP 19
DI 10.1016/j.baae.2017.06.004
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000409994800002
ER

PT J
AU Webster, NB
   Vermeij, GJ
AF Webster, Nicole B.
   Vermeij, Geerat J.
TI The varix: evolution, distribution, and phylogenetic clumping of a
   repeated gastropod innovation
SO ZOOLOGICAL JOURNAL OF THE LINNEAN SOCIETY
DT Article
DE evolutionary trends; fossil record; Gastropoda; shell sculpture; snails
ID MESOZOIC MARINE REVOLUTION; CERATOSTOMA-FOLIATUM; SHELL SCULPTURE;
   NEOGASTROPODA MURICIDAE; MOLLUSCA GASTROPODA; MOLECULAR PHYLOGENY;
   CONSTRUCTIONAL MORPHOLOGY; FUNCTIONAL-SIGNIFICANCE; CERITHIFORM
   GASTROPODS; WESTERN ATLANTIC
AB A recurrent theme in evolution is the repeated, independent origin of broadly adaptive, architecturally and functionally similar traits and structures. One such is the varix, a shell-sculpture innovation in gastropods. This periodic shell thickening functions mainly to defend the animal against shell crushing and peeling predators. Varices can be highly elaborate, forming broad wings or spines, and are often aligned in synchronous patterns. Here we define the different types of varices, explore their function and morphological variation, document the recent and fossil distribution of varicate taxa, and discuss emergent patterns of evolution. We conservatively found 41 separate origins of varices, which were concentrated in the more derived gastropod clades and generally arose since the mid-Mesozoic. Varices are more prevalent among marine, warm, and shallow waters, where predation is intense, on high-spired shells and in clades with collabral ribs. Diversification rates were correlated in a few cases with the presence of varices, especially in the Muricidae and Tonnoidea, but more than half of the origins are represented by three or fewer genera. Varices arose many times in many forms, but generally in a phylogenetically clumped manner (more frequently in particular higher taxa), a pattern common to many adaptations.
TC 2
Z9 3
SN 0024-4082
EI 1096-3642
PD AUG
PY 2017
VL 180
IS 4
BP 732
EP 754
DI 10.1093/zoolinnean/zlw015
SC Zoology
UT WOS:000409233800002
ER

PT J
AU Zozaya-Valdes, E
   Roth-Schulze, AJ
   Egan, S
   Thomas, T
AF Zozaya-Valdes, Enrique
   Roth-Schulze, Alexandra J.
   Egan, Suhelen
   Thomas, Torsten
TI Microbial community function in the bleaching disease of the marine
   macroalgae Delisea pulchra
SO ENVIRONMENTAL MICROBIOLOGY
DT Article
ID BACTERIAL PATHOGENS; NITRIC-OXIDE; PHOSPHOINOSITIDE METABOLISM;
   DEMOGRAPHIC CONSEQUENCES; HALOGENATED FURANONES; VIRULENCE; MECHANISM;
   PROTEINS; BIOFILMS; SEAWEED
AB Disease is increasingly viewed as a major factor impacting the health of both natural and cultured populations of marine organisms, including macroalgae. The red macroalga Delisea pulchra suffers from a bleaching disease resulting from host stress and infection by opportunistic bacterial pathogens. However, how pathogens cause the disease and how the entire macro algal-associated community is involved in the process is unclear. Here, we perform a metagenomic analysis of microbial communities associated with diseased and healthy D. pulchra across multiple bleaching events. Analysis of reconstructed 16S rRNA gene sequences showed that bacteria belonging to the families Rhodobacteraceae, Saprospiraceae and Flavobacteriaceae, including bacteria previously implicated in algal bleaching, to be enriched in diseased D. pulchra. Genes with predicted functions related to chemotaxis, motility, oxidative stress response, vitamin biosynthesis and nutrient acquisition were also prevalent in microbiomes of bleached algae, which may have a role in pathogenicity. Reconstruction of genomes that were abundant on bleached samples revealed that no single organism contains all bleaching-enriched functional genes. This observation indicates that potential virulence traits are distributed across multiple bacteria and that the disease in D. pulchra may result from a consortium of opportunistic pathogens, analogous to dysbiotic or polymicrobial diseases.
OI Zozaya-Valdes, Enrique/0000-0003-1141-7680; Thomas,
   Torsten/0000-0001-9557-3001
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 1462-2912
EI 1462-2920
PD AUG
PY 2017
VL 19
IS 8
SI SI
BP 3012
EP 3024
DI 10.1111/1462-2920.13758
SC Microbiology
UT WOS:000407790700009
PM 28419766
ER

PT J
AU Moser, GAO
   Piedras, FR
   Oaquim, ABJ
   Souza, DS
   Leles, SG
   de Lima, DT
   Ramos, ABA
   Farias, CD
   Fernandes, AM
AF Moser, Gleyci A. O.
   Piedras, Fernanda Reinhardt
   Oaquim, Anna Beatriz J.
   Souza, Daiana S.
   Leles, Suzana G.
   de Lima, Domenica T.
   Ramos, Ana Beatriz A.
   Farias, Cassia de O.
   Fernandes, Alexandre M.
TI Tidal effects on phytoplankton assemblages in a near-pristine estuary: a
   trait-based approach for the case of a shallow tropical ecosystem in
   Brazil
SO MARINE ECOLOGY-AN EVOLUTIONARY PERSPECTIVE
DT Article
DE phytoplankton size classes; shallow estuaries; trait-based analyses;
   tropical systems
ID GENUS SKELETONEMA BACILLARIOPHYCEAE; COASTAL-PLAIN ESTUARY; FUNCTIONAL
   DIVERSITY; SP-NOV; SIZE; DYNAMICS; ECOLOGY; BAY; VARIABILITY; COSTATUM
AB The study of near-pristine estuaries can be used as a tool for mitigation projects of harmful effects in anthropogenic eutrophic systems, since one can analyze the effect of temporal and spatial variations generated mainly by natural forces. Phytoplankton taxonomy has been used as a classical indicator to assess changes in transitional water communities, however alternative methods based on morphological, behavioral and physiological traits offer the opportunity to compare sites or moments with different taxonomic compositions. Our goal, in this context, is to evaluate phytoplankton community short-term and seasonal variability in a near-pristine estuary, Barra Grande estuary (Ilha Grande, RJ, Brazil), through species functional traits and thus community functional diversity. Samplings were carried out in a mooring in complete tidal cycles, seasonally during 2012. Our results showed a diverse phytoplankton community with 38 frequent and abundant taxa, marked by density variation (1.2x10.4-2x10.7cellL(-1)) in depth, with abundance inversely related to tidal currents. The functional structure of the phytoplankton community measured by functional diversity (FD), varied seasonally in and across a gradient of tidal energy. A core community, mainly represented by flagellates and dinoflagellates, occurred in all observations and was highly functional (high FD), exploiting a variety of habitats. The chain-forming diatoms were associated with high tidal energy, and occurred in higher densities during summer. Phytoplankton cell size, cell shape, and the ability to form colonies are extremely plastic traits that can be regulated by the environment, however, isolated tychopelagic diatoms were present in the study area across all seasons, with higher contributions in autumn and winter, reflecting the shallow characteristic of this system. During the winter, an exposed sandbar was formed, and the lack of connection with the ocean resulted in an abundance of riverine and brackish water taxa. In this near-pristine estuary the densities and occurrences of HAB phytoplankton are low. Trait-based analyses add information about community structure, which can be impacted by anthropogenic actions in urbanized coastal systems. Thus the information provided by this study regarding phytoplankton functional diversity and its relation to nutrients and hydrography in Barra Grande Estuary can be applied as a baseline model for the development of public policies.
OI Goncalves Leles, Suzana/0000-0002-7819-5851
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0173-9565
EI 1439-0485
PD AUG
PY 2017
VL 38
IS 4
AR e12450
DI 10.1111/maec.12450
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000408030500006
ER

PT J
AU Carvallo, GO
   Castro, SA
AF Carvallo, Gaston O.
   Castro, Sergio A.
TI Invasions but not extinctions change phylogenetic diversity of
   angiosperm assemblage on southeastern Pacific Oceanic islands
SO PLOS ONE
DT Article
ID BIOTIC HOMOGENIZATION; CONSERVATION BIOGEOGRAPHY; BIOLOGICAL INVASIONS;
   PLANT DIVERSITY; GLOBAL PATTERNS; SOUTH-AMERICA; RAIN-FOREST; COMMUNITY;
   CHILE; CONSEQUENCES
AB We assessed changes in phylogenetic diversity of angiosperm flora on six oceanic islands located in the southeastern Pacific Ocean, by comparing flora from two periods: the pre-European colonization of islands and current times. We hypothesize that, in the time between these periods, extinction of local plant species and addition of exotic plants modified phylogenetic-alpha-diversity at different levels (deeper and terminal phylogeny) and increased phylo-beta-diversity among islands. Based on floristic studies, we assembled a phylogenetic tree from occurrence data that includes 921 species, of which 165 and 756 were native or exotic in origin, respectively. Then, we studied change in the phylo-alpha-diversity and phylo-beta-diversity (1-Phylosor) by comparing pre-European and current times. Despite extinction of 18 native angiosperm species, an increase in species richness and phylo-adiversity was observed for all islands studied, attributed to introduction of exotic plants (between 6 to 477 species per island). We did not observe significant variation of mean phylogenetic distance (MPD), a measure of the 'deeper' phylogenetic diversity of assemblages (e.g., orders, families), suggesting that neither extinctions nor introductions altered phylogenetic structure of the angiosperms of these islands. In regard to phylo-beta-diversity, we detected temporal turnover (variation in phylogenetic composition) between periods to flora (0.38 +/- 0.11). However, when analyses were performed only considering native plants, we did not observe significant temporal turnover between periods (0.07 +/- 0.06). These results indicate that introduction of exotic angiosperms has contributed more notably than extinctions to the configuration of plant assemblages and phylogenetic diversity on the studied islands. Because phylogenetic diversity is closely related to functional diversity (species trait variations and roles performed by organisms), our results suggests that the introduction of exotic plants to these islands could have detrimental impacts for ecosystem functions and ecosystem services that islands provide (e.g. productivity).
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1932-6203
PD AUG 1
PY 2017
VL 12
IS 8
AR e0182105
DI 10.1371/journal.pone.0182105
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000406766500043
PM 28763508
ER

PT J
AU Varner, JM
   Kuljian, HG
   Kreye, JK
AF Varner, J. Morgan
   Kuljian, Howard G.
   Kreye, Jesse K.
TI Fires without tanoak: the effects of a non-native disease on future
   community flammability
SO BIOLOGICAL INVASIONS
DT Article
DE Douglas-fir; Fire regimes; Functional extinction; Litter;
   Notholithocarpus densiflorus; Phytophthora ramorum; Sudden oak death
ID SUDDEN OAK DEATH; BURNING CHARACTERISTICS; PHYTOPHTHORA-RAMORUM;
   UNITED-STATES; LEAF TRAITS; CONIFER ENCROACHMENT; SPECIES COMPOSITION;
   COASTAL CALIFORNIA; STAND DEVELOPMENT; TEMPERATE FOREST
AB Non-native pathogens affect forests throughout North America, resulting in changes in species composition, structure, and ecosystem processes. We studied the effects of the emergent disease sudden oak death (SOD) and the resulting functional extinction of tanoak, a highly susceptible native tree with flammable litter, on future community flammability. We quantified four flammability metrics (flame height; flaming duration; smoldering duration; and fuel consumed) for litter from each of five species that co-occur with tanoak and for species mixtures with and without tanoak (n = 14). We combined these flammability metrics in a Principal Components Analysis to evaluate potential shifts in litter flammability from pre-SOD (with tanoak litter) to post-SOD (where tanoak was replaced equally with remaining species). Litter flammability changed following the loss of tanoak, but the differences were species- and community-specific. Mixed-evergreen fuels where coast Douglas-fir litter replaced tanoak experienced consistent declines in flammability. Few substantive changes occurred in communities where coast redwood or other hardwoods co-occurred. We found consistent synergistic flammability effects when multiple species' litters were mixed; in cases where two or more species were mixed, most (75%) combinations burned with higher intensity (+8.1%) and fuelbeds flamed for a longer duration (+17.1%). Our work demonstrates that potential surface fire behavior in northwestern California may be dampened where Douglas-fir replaces tanoak, while those communities with other hardwoods or coast redwood may have redundant fuels and tanoak's absence in future fires may be inconspicuous. These results underscore the potential for cascading effects of non-native pathogens on ecosystem function in fire-prone ecosystems.
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 1387-3547
EI 1573-1464
PD AUG
PY 2017
VL 19
IS 8
BP 2307
EP 2317
DI 10.1007/s10530-017-1443-z
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000406405700008
ER

PT J
AU Soria, M
   Leigh, C
   Datry, T
   Bini, LM
   Bonada, N
AF Soria, Maria
   Leigh, Catherine
   Datry, Thibault
   Bini, Luis Mauricio
   Bonada, Nuria
TI Biodiversity in perennial and intermittent rivers: a meta-analysis
SO OIKOS
DT Article
ID HYPORHEIC INVERTEBRATE ASSEMBLAGES; MEDITERRANEAN-CLIMATE STREAMS;
   NATURAL FLOW REGIMES; MACROINVERTEBRATE ASSEMBLAGES; COMMUNITY
   STRUCTURE; HEADWATER STREAMS; FUNCTIONAL REDUNDANCY; SPECIES-DIVERSITY;
   BIOLOGICAL TRAITS; TEMPORARY RIVERS
AB Comprehensive knowledge of the effects of disturbances on biodiversity is crucial for conservation and management, not least because ecosystems with low biodiversity may be the most vulnerable. In rivers, the role of disturbance in shaping aquatic biodiversity has mainly focused on floods. Perennial rivers (PRs) often flood, whereas intermittent rivers (IRs) flood, stop flowing and dry. Despite the recent and significant increase in research on IRs, controversy remains about whether they are more or less biodiverse than PRs. Our aim was to determine (Q1) if PRs and IRs differ in biodiversity and (Q2) if the direction and magnitude of the differences (effect sizes) are related to environmental (climate, season, habitat, longitudinal zonation and anthropogenic disturbance) and/or biological factors (taxonomic group). We conducted a meta-analysis on 44 published studies of PR and IR biodiversity that had replicated data. We applied random effects models to the data to obtain weighted mean effect sizes for differences between PRs and IRs, and their confidence intervals, by first considering all studies and then by splitting studies into groups on the basis of the above factors. We found that biodiversity was significantly higher in PRs than in IRs (Q1). We also detected significant differences (PRs > IRs) in studies of macroinvertebrates, in those conducted within arid and temperate climates, dry and wet sampling seasons, headwaters, and regions subject to different levels of anthropogenic disturbance (Q2). Our meta-analysis suggests that the expected increase in the prevalence of IRs in certain regions of the world due to global change could result in a decrease in freshwater biodiversity. To better manage and preserve aquatic biodiversity under future global change scenarios and to avoid potential ecosystem consequences of biodiversity loss, conservation efforts should be targeted towards those environmental conditions or taxonomic groups with significant differences (PRs > IRs).
RI Bini, Luis/D-5865-2013
OI Bini, Luis/0000-0003-3398-9399; Leigh, Catherine/0000-0003-4186-1678
TC 5
Z9 5
SN 0030-1299
EI 1600-0706
PD AUG
PY 2017
VL 126
IS 8
BP 1078
EP 1089
DI 10.1111/oik.04118
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000406937000002
ER

PT J
AU de Castro, DMP
   Doledec, S
   Callisto, M
AF de Castro, Diego M. P.
   Doledec, Sylvain
   Callisto, Marcos
TI Landscape variables influence taxonomic and trait composition of insect
   assemblages in Neotropical savanna streams
SO FRESHWATER BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE aquatic insects; Ephemeroptera; Plecoptera and Trichoptera; land use;
   physical and chemical habitat; spatial scale
ID FUNCTIONAL FEEDING GROUPS; FRESH-WATER BIODIVERSITY; CO-INERTIA
   ANALYSIS; HEADWATER STREAMS; MACROINVERTEBRATE COMMUNITIES; BIOLOGICAL
   TRAITS; BRAZILIAN CERRADO; SPECIES TRAITS; BENTHIC MACROINVERTEBRATES;
   INVERTEBRATE COMMUNITIES
AB Stream invertebrate assemblages are structured by environmental factors acting at multiple spatial scales. Identifying the spatial scale that most influences the species-environment relationships is a major goal of community ecology. We evaluated the importance of catchment and site scales and associated environmental variables in shaping Ephemeroptera, Plecoptera and Trichoptera (EPT) assemblages in Neotropical savanna headwater streams. Sampling sites were associated with 20 catchment-scale variables that depicted land cover and land use as well as natural geophysical variables such as altitude and climate. Site-scale habitat was characterised by 55 variables that described habitat hydromorphology, substrate, flow, canopy, in-stream cover and water quality. EPT traits were assessed using 28 categories of 7 biological traits, which represented the best available current knowledge for EPT in Neotropical savanna streams. We analysed the relationships between the catchment- and site-scale habitat variables and the taxonomic and trait composition of insect assemblages using 1,760 samples collected in 160 stream sites. Catchment- and site-scale variables both explained significant variation in EPT taxon and trait composition. Substrate, habitat hydromorphology and land use most influenced variation in taxonomic composition, whereas trait composition was mainly affected by land use. Catchment geographic position explained less assemblage variation. To our knowledge, this study is the first assessment of the impact of catchment- and site-scale variables on the trait and taxon composition of stream insect assemblages in Neotropical savanna streams. It highlights the need for better regional biological knowledge of invertebrates to generate more general trait-based approaches in freshwater ecosystem conservation.
OI Parreira de Castro, Diego Marcel/0000-0001-7643-0160
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 0046-5070
EI 1365-2427
PD AUG
PY 2017
VL 62
IS 8
BP 1472
EP 1486
DI 10.1111/fwb.12961
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000405074600014
ER

PT J
AU Algarte, VM
   Siqueira, T
   Landeiro, VL
   Rodrigues, L
   Bonecker, CC
   Rodrigues, LC
   Santana, NF
   Thomaz, SM
   Bini, LM
AF Algarte, Vanessa Majewski
   Siqueira, Tadeu
   Landeiro, Victor Lemes
   Rodrigues, Liliana
   Bonecker, Claudia Costa
   Rodrigues, Luzia Cleide
   Santana, Natalia Fernanda
   Thomaz, Sidinei Magela
   Bini, Luis Mauricio
TI Main predictors of periphyton species richness depend on adherence
   strategy and cell size
SO PLOS ONE
DT Article
ID COMMUNITY STRUCTURE; SHALLOW LAKE; PHYTOPLANKTON; PRODUCTIVITY;
   DIVERSITY; ZOOPLANKTON; DISTURBANCE; FLOODPLAIN; DYNAMICS; PATTERNS
AB Periphytic algae are important components of aquatic ecosystems. However, the factors driving periphyton species richness variation remain largely unexplored. Here, we used data from a subtropical floodplain (Upper Parana A River floodplain, Brazil) to quantify the influence of environmental variables (total suspended matter, temperature, conductivity, nutrient concentrations, hydrology, phytoplankton biomass, phytoplankton species richness, aquatic macrophyte species richness and zooplankton density) on overall periphytic algal species richness and on the richness of different algal groups defined by morphological traits (cell size and adherence strategy). We expected that the coefficients of determination of the models estimated for different trait-based groups would be higher than the model coefficient of determination of the entire algal community. We also expected that the relative importance of explanatory variables in predicting species richness would differ among algal groups. The coefficient of determination for the model used to predict overall periphytic algal species richness was higher than the ones obtained for models used to predict the species richness of the different groups. Thus, our first prediction was not supported. Species richness of aquatic macrophytes was the main predictor of periphyton species richness of the entire community and a significant predictor of the species richness of small mobile, large mobile and small-loosely attached algae. Abiotic variables, phytoplankton species richness, chlorophyll-a concentration, and hydrology were also significant predictors, depending on the group. These results suggest that habitat heterogeneity (as proxied by aquatic macrophytes richness) is important for maintaining periphyton species richness in floodplain environments. However, other factors played a role, suggesting that the analysis of species richness of different trait-based groups unveils relationships that were not detectable when the entire community was analysed together.
RI Landeiro, Victor/H-2195-2012; Siqueira, Tadeu/A-6978-2009; Rodrigues,
   Luzia/B-7856-2017; Bini, Luis/D-5865-2013
OI Landeiro, Victor/0000-0002-9341-6050; Siqueira,
   Tadeu/0000-0001-5069-2904; Rodrigues, Luzia/0000-0002-0593-0931; Bini,
   Luis/0000-0003-3398-9399
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 1932-6203
PD JUL 24
PY 2017
VL 12
IS 7
AR e0181720
DI 10.1371/journal.pone.0181720
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000406362700062
PM 28742122
ER

PT J
AU Xu, H
   Qin, SS
   Lan, YH
   Liu, MJ
   Cao, XY
   Qiao, DR
   Cao, Y
   Cao, Y
AF Xu, Hui
   Qin, Shishang
   Lan, Yanhong
   Liu, Mengjia
   Cao, Xiyue
   Qiao, Dairong
   Cao, Yu
   Cao, Yi
TI Comparative genomic analysis of Paenibacillus sp SSG-1 and its closely
   related strains reveals the effect of glycometabolism on environmental
   adaptation
SO SCIENTIFIC REPORTS
DT Article
ID PROTEIN-SEQUENCE ALIGNMENTS; BETA-AGARASE; SP-NOV; PAN-GENOME;
   IDENTIFICATION; PURIFICATION; PHYLOGENIES; ANNOTATION; COVERAGE; CLONING
AB The extensive environmental adaptability of the genus Paenibacillus is related to the enormous diversity of its gene repertoires. Paenibacillus sp. SSG-1 has previously been reported, and its agardegradation trait has attracted our attention. Here, the genome sequence of Paenibacillus sp. SSG-1, together with 76 previously sequenced strains, was comparatively studied. The results show that the pan-genome of Paenibacillus is open and indicate that the current taxonomy of this genus is incorrect. The incessant flux of gene repertoires resulting from the processes of gain and loss largely contributed to the difference in genomic content and genome size in Paenibacillus. Furthermore, a large number of genes gained are associated with carbohydrate transport and metabolism. It indicates that the evolution of glycometabolism is a key factor for the environmental adaptability of Paenibacillus species. Interestingly, through horizontal gene transfer, Paenibacillus sp. SSG-1 acquired an approximately 150 kb DNA fragment and shows an agar-degrading characteristic distinct from most other non-marine bacteria. This region may be transported in bacteria as a complete unit responsible for agar degradation. Taken together, these results provide insights into the evolutionary pattern of Paenibacillus and have implications for studies on the taxonomy and functional genomics of this genus.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 2045-2322
PD JUL 18
PY 2017
VL 7
AR 5720
DI 10.1038/s41598-017-06160-9
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000405746500031
PM 28720902
ER

PT J
AU Duhaime, MB
   Solonenko, N
   Roux, S
   Verberkmoes, NC
   Wichels, A
   Sullivan, MB
AF Duhaime, Melissa B.
   Solonenko, Natalie
   Roux, Simon
   Verberkmoes, Nathan C.
   Wichels, Antje
   Sullivan, Matthew B.
TI Comparative Omics and Trait Analyses of Marine Pseudoalteromonas Phages
   Advance the Phage OTU Concept
SO FRONTIERS IN MICROBIOLOGY
DT Article
DE phage; marine microbiology; particle-associated; comparative genomics;
   Pseudoalteromonas
ID COMPLETE GENOME SEQUENCE; STRUCTURAL PROTEINS; TRANSCRIPTION INITIATION;
   BIOGEOCHEMICAL CYCLES; ESCHERICHIA-COLI; TIME BOMBS; VIRUSES;
   BACTERIOPHAGE; GENE; PHOSPHATE
AB Viruses influence the ecology and evolutionary trajectory of microbial communities. Yet our understanding of their roles in ecosystems is limited by the paucity of model systems available for hypothesis generation and testing. Further, virology is limited by the lack of a broadly accepted conceptual framework to classify viral diversity into evolutionary and ecologically cohesive units. Here, we introduce genomes, structural proteomes, and quantitative host range data for eight Pseudoalteromonas phages isolated from Helgoland (North Sea, Germany) and use these data to advance a genome-based viral operational taxonomic unit (OTU) definition. These viruses represent five new genera and inform 498 unaffiliated or unannotated protein clusters (PCs) from global virus metagenomes. In a comparison of previously sequenced Pseudoalteromonas phage isolates (n = 7) and predicted prophages (n = 31), the eight phages are unique. They share a genus with only one other isolate, Pseudoalteromonas podophage RIO-1 (East Sea, South Korea) and two Pseudoalteromonas prophages. Mass-spectrometry of purified viral particles identified 12-20 structural proteins per phage. When combined with 3-D structural predictions, these data led to the functional characterization of five previously unidentified major capsid proteins. Protein functional predictions revealed mechanisms for hijacking host metabolism and resources. Further, they uncovered a hybrid sipho-myovirus that encodes genes for Mu-like infection rarely described in ocean systems. Finally, we used these data to evaluate a recently introduced definition for virus populations that requires members of the same population to have >95% average nucleotide identity across at least 80% of their genes. Using physiological traits and genomics, we proposed a conceptual model for a viral OTU definition that captures evolutionarily cohesive and ecologically distinct units. In this trait-based framework, sensitive hosts are considered viral niches, while host ranges and infection efficiencies are tracked as viral traits. Quantitative host range assays revealed conserved traits within virus OTUs that break down between OTUs, suggesting the defined units capture niche and fitness differentiation. Together these analyses provide a foundation for model system-based hypothesis testing that will improve our understanding of marine copiotrophs, as well as phage-host interactions on the ocean particles and aggregates where Pseudoalteromonas thrive.
RI Wichels, Antje/R-6992-2016
OI Wichels, Antje/0000-0002-2060-1845; Duhaime, Melissa/0000-0001-7884-5087
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 1664-302X
PD JUL 6
PY 2017
VL 8
AR 1241
DI 10.3389/fmicb.2017.01241
SC Microbiology
UT WOS:000405228800001
PM 28729861
ER

PT J
AU McNeish, RE
   Benbow, ME
   McEwan, RW
AF McNeish, Rachel E.
   Benbow, M. Eric
   McEwan, Ryan W.
TI Removal of the Invasive Shrub, Lonicera maackii (Amur Honeysuckle), from
   a Headwater Stream Riparian Zone Shifts Taxonomic and Functional
   Composition of the Aquatic Biota
SO INVASIVE PLANT SCIENCE AND MANAGEMENT
DT Article
DE Community; diversity; macroinvertebrate
ID LIFE-HISTORY STRATEGIES; TRAIT-BASED APPROACH; SEASONAL-VARIATION;
   MACROINVERTEBRATE COMMUNITIES; AGRICULTURAL LANDSCAPE; ARTHROPOD
   COMMUNITIES; PLANT COMMUNITY; URBAN STREAM; LEAF-LITTER; DECOMPOSITION
AB Riparian plant invasions can result in near-monocultures along stream and river systems, prompting management agencies to target invasive species for removal as an ecological restoration strategy. Riparian plant invaders can alter resource conditions in the benthos and drive bottom-up shifts in aquatic biota. However, the influence of management activities on the structure and function of aquatic communities is not well understood. We investigated how removal of a riparian invader, Lonicera maackii (Amur honeysuckle), influenced aquatic macroinvertebrate community functional and taxonomic diversity in a headwater stream. We hypothesized that removal of L. maackii from invaded riparia would result in (H-1) increased aquatic macroinvertebrate abundance, density, and diversity; (H-2) a taxonomic and functional shift in community composition; and, in particular, (H-3) increased functional diversity. Aquatic macroinvertebrates were sampled monthly from autumn 2010 to winter 2013 in headwater stream riffles with a dense riparian L. maackii invasion and those where L. maackii had been experimentally removed. We found macroinvertebrate density was significantly higher in the L. maackii removal reach (P<0.05) and that macroinvertebrate community structure and functional trait presence was distinct between stream reaches and across seasons (P<0.05). The removal reach exhibited greater functional richness during spring and summer and had more unique functionally relevant taxa (20% and 85%) compared with the L. maackii reach (5% and 75%) during summer and autumn seasons. Our results suggest bottom-up processes link restoration activities in the riparian corridor and aquatic biota through alterations of functional composition in the benthic community.
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 1939-7291
EI 1939-747X
PD JUL-SEP
PY 2017
VL 10
IS 3
BP 232
EP 246
DI 10.1017/inp.2017.22
SC Plant Sciences
UT WOS:000418744200002
ER

PT J
AU Silveira, MJ
   Thiebaut, G
AF Silveira, Marcio Jose
   Thiebaut, Gabrielle
TI Impact of climate warming on plant growth varied according to the season
SO LIMNOLOGICA
DT Article
DE Elodea canadensis; Lagarosiphon major; Egeria densa; Temperature
   increase; Functional traits
ID SUBMERGED MACROPHYTES; ELODEA-CANADENSIS; AQUATIC PLANTS; TEMPERATURE;
   BIOMASS; HYDROCHARITACEAE; PHOTOSYNTHESIS; AVAILABILITY; ACCLIMATION;
   MORPHOLOGY
AB Climate changes will promote the growth of invasive aquatic macrophytes. The aim of our study was to analyse the responses of three invasive plants (Elodea canadensis, Egeria densa and Lagarosiphon major) to a temperature increase of 3 degrees C in spring, summer and winter. At each season we measured four functional traits: the Relative Growth Rate 'RGR', Relative Leaf surface area Growth Rate, number of lateral branches and roots. E. canadensis showed the highest growth and vigour in spring and in summer. The Relative Growth Rate was enhanced by an elevation of temperature for E. canadensis and for E. densa. A 3 degrees C temperature increase stimulated root production for all species in summer, whereas the number of lateral branches was favoured in spring for E. canadensis. Climate warming had a greater impact on plant growth in spring than in summer and late winter. The response of species to climate warming was species-specific and so an increase in temperature should favour the spread of E. canadensis.
TC 2
Z9 3
SN 0075-9511
EI 1873-5851
PD JUL
PY 2017
VL 65
BP 4
EP 9
DI 10.1016/j.limno.2017.05.003
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000408287200002
ER

PT J
AU Zhong, XX
   Xu, GJ
   Xu, HL
AF Zhong, Xiaoxiao
   Xu, Guangjian
   Xu, Henglong
TI An approach to analysis of colonization dynamics in community
   functioning of protozoa for bioassessment of marine pollution
SO ECOLOGICAL INDICATORS
DT Article
DE Functional trait; Community functioning; Colonization dynamics;
   Bioassessment; Protozoa; Marine ecosystems
ID DWELLING CILIATE COMMUNITIES; COASTAL WATERS; BENTHIC ECOSYSTEMS;
   DIVERSITY INDEXES; BIOLOGICAL TRAITS; MULTIPLE TRAITS; QUALITY STATUS;
   BIODIVERSITY; ASSEMBLAGES; REDUNDANCY
AB Biological trait analysis is a powerful tool to summarize the spatial temporal patterns of community functioning and ecosystem process at taxon-free resolutions. To identify the optimal colonization period with high homogeneity in functional patterns of protozoa for bioassessment, 1-month baseline colonization survey was conducted in coastal waters of the Yellow Sea. A fuzzy-coding functional trait system was used to summarize the functional structure of protozoan communities during the colonization process. The functional patterns showed a low homogeneity during the early stage (3-7 days), followed by a stable stage (10-14 days) with high homogeneity, and the last stage (21-28 days) with high heterogeneity. The functional richness showed a low variability, while the functional evenness and divergence generally showed a decreasing trend during the whole colonization process. Furthermore, the functional dispersion and RaoQ indices generally leveled off only during the stable stage. These results suggest that it is necessary to determine the optimal exposure time period with high homogeneity of community functioning for bioassessment using protozoan colonization in marine ecosystems. (C) 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 1470-160X
EI 1872-7034
PD JUL
PY 2017
VL 78
BP 526
EP 530
DI 10.1016/j.ecolind.2017.03.050
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000406435900052
ER

PT J
AU Xu, JS
   Chen, Y
   Zhang, LX
   Chai, YF
   Wang, M
   Guo, YX
   Li, T
   Yue, M
AF Xu, Jinshi
   Chen, Yu
   Zhang, Lixia
   Chai, Yongfu
   Wang, Mao
   Guo, Yaoxin
   Li, Ting
   Yue, Ming
TI Using phylogeny and functional traits for assessing community assembly
   along environmental gradients: A deterministic process driven by
   elevation
SO ECOLOGY AND EVOLUTION
DT Article
DE community assembly; environmental gradients; functional traits;
   phylogenetic signal; phylogeny
ID TROPICAL TREE COMMUNITY; LONG-TERM SUCCESSION; PLANT TRAITS;
   BETA-DIVERSITY; ECOLOGICAL COMMUNITIES; CONTRASTING PATTERNS; COASTAL
   CALIFORNIA; AMAZONIAN FOREST; SPATIAL SCALES; GLOBAL CHANGE
AB Community assembly processes is the primary focus of community ecology. Using phylogenetic-based and functional trait-based methods jointly to explore these processes along environmental gradients are useful ways to explain the change of assembly mechanisms under changing world. Our study combined these methods to test assembly processes in wide range gradients of elevation and other habitat environmental factors. We collected our data at 40 plots in Taibai Mountain, China, with more than 2,300m altitude difference in study area and then measured traits and environmental factors. Variance partitioning was used to distinguish the main environment factors leading to phylogeny and traits change among 40 plots. Principal component analysis (PCA) was applied to colligate other environment factors. Community assembly patterns along environmental gradients based on phylogenetic and functional methods were studied for exploring assembly mechanisms. Phylogenetic signal was calculated for each community along environmental gradients in order to detect the variation of trait performance on phylogeny. Elevation showed a better explanatory power than other environment factors for phylogenetic and most traits' variance. Phylogenetic and several functional structure clustered at high elevation while some conserved traits overdispersed. Convergent tendency which might be caused by filtering or competition along elevation was detected based on functional traits. Leaf dry matter content (LDMC) and leaf nitrogen content along PCA 1 axis showed conflicting patterns comparing to patterns showed on elevation. LDMC exhibited the strongest phylogenetic signal. Only the phylogenetic signal of maximum plant height showed explicable change along environmental gradients. Synthesis. Elevation is the best environment factors for predicting phylogeny and traits change. Plant's phylogenetic and some functional structures show environmental filtering in alpine region while it shows different assembly processes in middle- and low-altitude region by different trait/phylogeny. The results highlight deterministic processes dominate community assembly in large-scale environmental gradients. Performance of phylogeny and traits along gradients may be independent with each other. The novel method for calculating functional structure which we used in this study and the focus of phylogenetic signal change along gradients may provide more useful ways to detect community assembly mechanisms.
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 2045-7758
PD JUL
PY 2017
VL 7
IS 14
BP 5056
EP 5069
DI 10.1002/ece3.3068
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000406323100004
PM 28770046
ER

PT J
AU Giam, X
   Chen, W
   Schriever, TA
   Van Driesche, R
   Muneepeerakul, R
   Lytle, DA
   Olden, JD
AF Giam, Xingli
   Chen, William
   Schriever, Tiffany A.
   Van Driesche, Richard
   Muneepeerakul, Rachata
   Lytle, David A.
   Olden, Julian D.
TI Hydrology drives seasonal variation in dryland stream macroinvertebrate
   communities
SO AQUATIC SCIENCES
DT Article
DE Intermittent flow; Traits-based ecology; Community assembly; Habitat
   templet; Life history; Ecological filtering
ID MEDITERRANEAN-CLIMATE STREAMS; INVERTEBRATE COMMUNITIES; PERENNIAL
   STREAMS; BIOLOGICAL TRAITS; HABITAT TEMPLET; SPECIES TRAITS; DESERT
   STREAM; LOW-FLOW; ASSEMBLAGES; RESISTANCE
AB Many lotic ecosystems are spatially and temporally heterogeneous but none more so than dryland streams flowing through arid and semi-arid landscapes. Understanding seasonal variation in richness and trait composition is critical to our fundamental understanding of these dynamic stream networks. Here, we analyzed aquatic macroinvertebrate communities within perennial and intermittent reaches in replicate dryland watersheds in southwestern USA across 10 seasons and 4 years. We quantified how hydrology, season, and microhabitat type affected taxa richness and trait composition. Taxa richness was higher in perennial than intermittent reaches, in pools than riffles, and in fall and summer than in spring. The interaction between hydrology and season was important; the difference between fall high and spring low richness was greater in intermittent than perennial streams. Hydrology was the main predictor of trait composition; intermittent streams supported a larger fraction of small taxa, taxa with the ability to undergo diapause, and uni- or multivoltine taxa (i.e., taxa with shorter life cycles). Trait composition did not vary across seasons among perennial reaches whereas the fraction of aerial dispersers appeared to be greater in spring than other seasons among intermittent reaches. Our results were largely consistent with predictions of the habitat templet; r-selected traits were more frequently represented in intermittent communities. The temporal characterization of macroinvertebrate community structure in dryland streams provides a powerful glimpse of how stream communities may respond to a drying climate.
OI Giam, Xingli/0000-0002-5239-9477
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 1015-1621
EI 1420-9055
PD JUL
PY 2017
VL 79
IS 3
BP 705
EP 717
DI 10.1007/s00027-017-0530-7
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000405798900021
ER

PT J
AU Conti, L
   de Bello, F
   Leps, J
   Acosta, ATR
   Carboni, M
AF Conti, Luisa
   de Bello, Francesco
   Leps, Jan
   Acosta, Alicia Teresa Rosario
   Carboni, Marta
TI Environmental gradients and micro-heterogeneity shape fine-scale plant
   community assembly on coastal dunes
SO JOURNAL OF VEGETATION SCIENCE
DT Article
DE Abiotic stress; Biotic interactions; Competition; Convergence;
   Divergence; Environmental filtering; Functional traits; Mantel's r;
   Micro-abiotic filtering; Species co-occurrence
ID EXPERIMENTAL GRASSLAND COMMUNITIES; PHYLOGENETIC STRUCTURE; TRAIT
   CONVERGENCE; SPECIES-DIVERSITY; NULL MODELS; PATTERNS; FACILITATION;
   COEXISTENCE; COMPETITION; MECHANISMS
AB Questions: How do fine scale community assembly processes (e.g., environmental filtering, symmetric competition, hierarchical competition, facilitation) vary along a natural stress gradient on coastal sand dunes? How does local environmental heterogeneity affect these processes?
   Location: Mediterranean coastal sand dunes, central Italy (Montalto Marina, Lazio region).
   Methods: We quantified spatial (co-occurrence) and functional patterns (degree of divergence in the traits of co-occurring species) at a fine scale (0.5 m x 0.5 m subplots) in herbaceous communities (2 m x 2 m plots) of coastal habitats along the sea-inland vegetation zonation. We then studied how the fine-scale co-occurrence patterns (aggregation vs segregation) varied across habitats of the zonation. Finally, we fitted linear models assessing the relationship of the fine-scale functional patterns (convergence vs divergence) with (1) the average environmental conditions along the sea-inland environmental stress gradient, and (2) the environmental heterogeneity within plots.
   Results: Spatial and functional patterns conveyed complementary information. Within-community spatial segregation was more common further from the sea, which suggests the dominance of competitive processes in the least stressed communities. Fine-scale convergence or divergence depended, for all functional traits, on the average environmental conditions of the community along the gradient, suggesting an effect of environmental stress on the prevailing assembly processes. However, it also depended on the environmental heterogeneity within the community, suggesting that micro-abiotic filtering might play a more important role than previously anticipated in determining fine-scale community assembly.
   Conclusions: Our results suggest that contrasting assembly processes act simultaneously on community assembly along environmental gradients, both as a function of average environmental conditions and of local heterogeneity. Future studies assessing community assembly should therefore avoid neglecting the role of micro-abiotic filtering in shaping functional patterns. Moreover, only by integrating multiple sources of information (trait patterns, spatial patterns and environmental variation) were we able to disentangle fine-scale community assembly processes and reinforce our interpretation of community patterns.
RI Leps, Jan/B-6913-2013; Carboni, Marta/A-2658-2012
OI Leps, Jan/0000-0002-4822-7429; Carboni, Marta/0000-0002-9348-4758;
   Acosta, Alicia T. R./0000-0001-6572-3187
TC 1
Z9 3
SN 1100-9233
EI 1654-1103
PD JUL
PY 2017
VL 28
IS 4
BP 762
EP 773
DI 10.1111/jvs.12533
SC Plant Sciences; Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Forestry
UT WOS:000405595300011
ER

PT J
AU Kremer, CT
   Thomas, MK
   Litchman, E
AF Kremer, Colin T.
   Thomas, Mridul K.
   Litchman, Elena
TI Temperature- and size-scaling of phytoplankton population growth rates:
   Reconciling the Eppley curve and the metabolic theory of ecology
SO LIMNOLOGY AND OCEANOGRAPHY
DT Article
ID CELL-SIZE; MARINE-PHYTOPLANKTON; QUANTILE REGRESSION; THERMAL
   ADAPTATION; GENERAL-MODEL; ALLOMETRY; EVOLUTION; TRAITS; CARBON;
   CHLOROPHYLL
AB Quantifying how environmental factors control the growth of phytoplankton communities is essential for building a mechanistic understanding of global biogeochemical cycles and aquatic food web dynamics. The strong effects of temperature on population growth rate have inspired two frameworksthe Eppley curve and the metabolic theory of ecologythat produce different quantitative relationships and employ distinct statistical approaches. Reconciling these relationships is necessary to ensure the accuracy of ecosystem models. In this paper, we develop ways to compare these frameworks, overcoming their methodological differences. Then, analyzing an extensive dataset (> 4200 growth rate measurements), we find that increases in population growth rate with temperature are consistent with metabolic theory, and weaker than previous estimates of the Eppley curve. A 10 degrees C temperature increase will increase growth rates by a factor of 1.53, rather than 1.88 as in previous studies of the Eppley curve. Size and functional group membership are also critical. Population growth rates decrease with size, but much less strongly that metabolic theory predicts. The growth rates of different functional groups scale similarly with temperature, but some groups grow faster than others, independent of temperature. Our results reconcile the analytical methods of the Eppley curve and metabolic theory, demonstrate that metabolic theory's temperature-scaling predictions are more accurate, and provide new insights into the factors controlling phytoplankton growth. To avoid over-estimating the effects of temperature on primary productivity, the parameterization of ecosystem models should be revised.
OI Thomas, Mridul/0000-0002-5089-5610
TC 5
Z9 5
SN 0024-3590
EI 1939-5590
PD JUL
PY 2017
VL 62
IS 4
BP 1658
EP 1670
DI 10.1002/lno.10523
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000404993100023
ER

PT J
AU Gounand, I
   Harvey, E
   Ganesanandamoorthy, P
   Altermatt, F
AF Gounand, Isabelle
   Harvey, Eric
   Ganesanandamoorthy, Pravin
   Altermatt, Florian
TI Subsidies mediate interactions between communities across space
SO OIKOS
DT Article
ID DISSOLVED ORGANIC-MATTER; FOOD WEBS; FRESH-WATER; TERRESTRIAL
   ECOSYSTEMS; LITTER DECOMPOSITION; TROPHIC CASCADES; ECOLOGY; LAKE;
   DYNAMICS; PHYTOPLANKTON
AB Most spatial ecology focuses on how species dispersal affects community dynamics and coexistence. Ecosystems, however, are also commonly connected by flows of resources. We experimentally tested how neighbouring communities indirectly influence each other in absence of dispersal, via resource exchanges. Using two-patch microcosm meta-ecosystems, we manipulated community composition and dynamics, by varying separately species key functional traits (autotroph versus heterotroph species and size of consumer species) and trophic structure of aquatic communities (species growing alone or in presence of competitors or predators). We then analysed the effects of species functional traits and trophic structure on communities connected through spatial subsidies in the absence of actual dispersal. Both functional traits and trophic structure strongly affected dynamics across neighbouring communities. Heterotroph communities connected to autotroph neighbours developed better than with heterotroph neighbours, such that coexistence of competitors was determined by the functional traits of the neighbouring community. Densities in autotroph communities were also strikingly higher when receiving subsidies from heterotroph communities compared to their own subsidies when grown in isolated ecosystems. In contrast, communities connected to predator-dominated ecosystems collapsed, without any direct contact with the predators. Our results demonstrate that because community composition and structure modify the distribution of biomass within a community, they may also affect communities connected through subsidies through quantitative and qualitative changes of detritus flows. This stresses that ecosystem management should account for such interdependencies mediated by spatial subsidies, given that local community alterations cascade across space onto other ecosystems even if species dispersal is completely absent.
OI Harvey, Eric/0000-0002-8601-7326; Gounand, Isabelle/0000-0002-0675-3973;
   Altermatt, Florian/0000-0002-4831-6958
TC 7
Z9 8
SN 0030-1299
EI 1600-0706
PD JUL
PY 2017
VL 126
IS 7
BP 972
EP 979
DI 10.1111/oik.03922
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000404628700006
ER

PT J
AU Mitchell, RM
   Wright, JP
   Ames, GM
AF Mitchell, Rachel M.
   Wright, Justin P.
   Ames, Gregory M.
TI Intraspecific variability improves environmental matching, but does not
   increase ecological breadth along a wet-to-dry ecotone
SO OIKOS
DT Article
ID LEAF TRAIT RELATIONSHIPS; GEOGRAPHICAL RANGE SIZE; PLANT FUNCTIONAL
   TRAITS; PHENOTYPIC PLASTICITY; SPECIES RICHNESS; COASTAL CALIFORNIA;
   COMMUNITY ECOLOGY; NICHE BREADTH; DIVERSITY; DISTRIBUTIONS
AB It is widely assumed that higher levels of intraspecific variability in one or more traits should allow species to persist under a wider range of environmental conditions. However, few studies have examined whether species that exhibit high variability are found in a wider range of environmental conditions, and whether variability increases the ability of a species to adapt to prevailing ecological gradients. We used four plant functional traits, specific leaf area (SLA), leaf dry matter content (LDMC), leaf carbon to nitrogen ratio (C: N) and maximum plant height in 49 species across a strong environmental gradient to answer three questions: 1) is there evidence for 'high-variability' species (that is, species which show high variability in multiple traits, simultaneously)? 2) are species with more variable traits present across a wider range of environmental conditions than less variable species? And 3) whether more variable species show better trait-environment matching to the prevailing abiotic (soil moisture) gradient at the site? We found little evidence for a 'high-variability' species. Variability was correlated for two leaf traits, SLA and LDMC, while variability in leaf traits and plant height were not correlated. We found little evidence that more variable species were present in more diverse conditions: only variation in SLA was correlated with a wider ecological niche breadth. For plant traits along the soil-moisture gradient, higher variability led to better trait-environment matching in half of measured traits. Overall, we found little support for the existence of 'high-variability' species, but that variability in SLA is correlated with a wider ecological breadth. We also found evidence that variation in traits can improve trait-environment matching, a relationship which may facilitate our understanding ecological breadth along prevailing gradients, and community assembly on the basis of traits.
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 0030-1299
EI 1600-0706
PD JUL
PY 2017
VL 126
IS 7
BP 988
EP 995
DI 10.1111/oik.04001
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000404628700008
ER

PT J
AU Henriques, S
   Guilhaumon, F
   Villeger, S
   Amoroso, S
   Franca, S
   Pasquaud, S
   Cabral, HN
   Vasconcelos, RP
AF Henriques, Sofia
   Guilhaumon, Francois
   Villeger, Sebastien
   Amoroso, Sandra
   Franca, Susana
   Pasquaud, Stephanie
   Cabral, Henrique N.
   Vasconcelos, Rita P.
TI Biogeographical region and environmental conditions drive functional
   traits of estuarine fish assemblages worldwide
SO FISH AND FISHERIES
DT Article
DE body size; depth; functional group; longevity; salinity; trophic
ID MARINE HERBIVOROUS FISHES; FRESH-WATER FISHES; BODY-SIZE; SPECIES
   RICHNESS; GLOBAL PATTERNS; CLIMATE-CHANGE; ECOSYSTEM SERVICES; COMMUNITY
   ECOLOGY; BETA DIVERSITY; BERGMANNS RULE
AB Assessing trait-environment relationships is crucial for predicting effects of natural and human-induced environmental change on biota. We compiled a global database of fish assemblages in estuaries, functional traits of fishes and ecosystem features of estuaries. And we quantified the relative importance of ecosystem features as drivers of patterns of fish functional traits among estuaries worldwide (i.e. drivers of the proportions of fish traits). In addition to biogeographical context, two main environmental gradients regulate traits patterns: firstly temperature, and secondly estuary size and hydrological connectivity of the estuary with the marine ecosystem. Overall, estuaries in colder regions, with larger areas and with higher hydrological connectivity with the marine ecosystem, have higher proportions of marine fish (versus freshwater), macrocarnivores and planktivores (versus omnivores, herbivores and detritivores) and larger fish, with greater maximum depth of distribution and longer lifespan. The observed trait patterns and trait-environment relationships are likely generated by multiple causal processes linked to physiological constraints due to temperature and salinity, size-dependent biotic interactions, as well as habitat availability and connectivity. Biogeographical context and environmental conditions drive species richness and composition, and present results show that they also drive assemblage traits. The observed trait patterns and trait-environment relationships suggest that assemblage composition is determined by the functional role of species within ecosystems. Conservation strategies should be coordinated globally and ensure protection of an array of estuaries that differ in ecosystem features, even if some of those estuaries do not support high species richness.
RI Cabral, Henrique/D-5201-2011; Villeger, Sebastien/C-6272-2011;
   Vasconcelos, Rita/F-1236-2011; Franca, Susana/B-2847-2012
OI Cabral, Henrique/0000-0002-7646-6208; Villeger,
   Sebastien/0000-0002-2362-7178; Vasconcelos, Rita/0000-0002-1113-4915;
   Franca, Susana/0000-0002-3406-6951; Henriques,
   Sofia/0000-0002-0165-2997; Amoroso Ferreira Jorge,
   Sandra/0000-0002-5446-3620; Guilhaumon, Francois/0000-0003-4707-8932
TC 5
Z9 5
SN 1467-2960
EI 1467-2979
PD JUL
PY 2017
VL 18
IS 4
BP 752
EP 771
DI 10.1111/faf.12203
SC Fisheries
UT WOS:000404555100010
ER

PT J
AU Pecuchet, L
   Lindegren, M
   Hidalgo, M
   Delgado, M
   Esteban, A
   Fock, HO
   de Sola, LG
   Punzon, A
   Solmundsson, J
   Payne, MR
AF Pecuchet, Laurene
   Lindegren, Martin
   Hidalgo, Manuel
   Delgado, Marina
   Esteban, Antonio
   Fock, Heino O.
   Gil de Sola, Luis
   Punzon, Antonio
   Solmundsson, Jon
   Payne, Mark R.
TI From traits to life-history strategies: Deconstructing fish community
   composition across European seas
SO GLOBAL ECOLOGY AND BIOGEOGRAPHY
DT Article
DE archetypal analysis; community composition; depth; fecundity;
   life-history strategies; marine fish; offspring survival; size;
   temperature; trade-off; trait
ID FAST-SLOW CONTINUUM; FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; ARCHETYPAL ANALYSIS; SPECIES
   RICHNESS; MARINE FISH; NORTH-SEA; POPULATION REGULATION;
   ECOSYSTEM-FUNCTION; AMERICAN FISHES; CLIMATE-CHANGE
AB Aim: The life history of a species is determined by trade-offs between growth, survival and reproduction to maximize fitness in a given environment. Following a theoretical model, we investigate whether the composition of marine fish communities can be understood in terms of a set of life-history strategies and whether the prevalence of the strategies follows specific spatial patterns that can be related to the environment.
   Location: European seas.
   Time period: 1980-2014.
   Major taxa studied: Fish.
   Methods: An extensive set of scientific bottom trawl surveys was collected to obtain the species composition of fish communities across European seas. We complemented these data with species-specific information regarding six life-history traits, reflecting reproductive, growth and feeding modes. We then calculated the optimal number of strategies needed to summarize the information contained in the traits by using archetypal analysis. The proportion of each obtained strategy in the communities and their spatial patterns were explained as a function of the environment and their temporal changes were investigated.
   Results: The species could be decomposed into a continuum of three life-history strategies-opportunistic, periodic and equilibrium-resulting from trade-offs between traits. The marked spatial patterns of these strategies could be explained by depth, temperature and its seasonality, chlorophyll and fishing effort. In recent years, opportunistic and equilibrium strategies significantly increased, probably due to an increase in temperature and decrease in fishing effort.
   Main conclusions: Our empirical analysis supports a theoretical framework outlining three life-history strategies of fish. The strategies vary predictably in space and time in response to the environment. This highlights the underlying process whereby fitness is optimized through trade-offs between growth, feeding and reproduction under different environmental conditions. Due to their response to the environment, life-history strategies provide a suitable tool for monitoring and understanding community changes in response to natural and anthropogenic stressors, including fishing and climate change.
RI Payne, Mark/C-6844-2008
OI Payne, Mark/0000-0001-5795-2481; Hidalgo, Manuel/0000-0002-3494-9658;
   Solmundsson, Jon/0000-0002-2685-777X; Gil de Sola,
   Luis/0000-0003-1987-9716
TC 5
Z9 5
SN 1466-822X
EI 1466-8238
PD JUL
PY 2017
VL 26
IS 7
BP 812
EP 822
DI 10.1111/geb.12587
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Physical Geography
UT WOS:000403834400005
ER

PT J
AU Lokko, K
   Virro, T
   Kotta, J
AF Lokko, Kulli
   Virro, Taavi
   Kotta, Jonne
TI Seasonal variability in the structure and functional diversity of
   psammic rotifer communities: role of environmental parameters
SO HYDROBIOLOGIA
DT Article
DE Psammon; Rotifers; Spatial patterns; Seasonal dynamics; Traits;
   Functional diversity
ID FRESH-WATER; MULTIPLE TRAITS; TROPHIC STATE; BODY-SIZE; LAKES;
   ZOOPLANKTON; ESTONIA; OXYGEN; ZOOPSAMMON; COMPONENTS
AB Data on the variability in structure and functioning of interstitial rotifer assemblages are rare; however, this knowledge is essential for understanding their role in the interstitial food web. In the present study, we characterized psammic rotifer communities in terms of dominance structure, trophic traits, taxonomic and functional diversity at a seasonal scale in freshwater lakes across Estonia and coastal beaches of the Baltic Sea. A total of 42 rotifer species were found from the coastal beaches and 66 species from the lakes. Functional indices did not exhibit smaller seasonal variability and neither did they respond better to changes in the environment compared to taxonomic indices. However, there were differences how environmental variables affected these two broad groups of response variables. The taxonomy-based indices of rotifer communities were primarily driven by seasonal temperature regime, sediment characteristics and anthropogenic stressors, whereas the trait-based indices were a function of ecosystem types (freshwater or brackish water). The functional indices of the psammic rotifer communities strongly distinguished between freshwater and brackish habitats indicating that rotifers have different functional roles in food webs in fresh and brackish water environments.
OI Kotta, Jonne/0000-0002-4970-6755
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 0018-8158
EI 1573-5117
PD JUL
PY 2017
VL 796
IS 1
BP 287
EP 307
DI 10.1007/s10750-016-2923-3
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000403357600024
ER

PT J
AU Heino, J
   Tolonen, KT
AF Heino, Jani
   Tolonen, Kimmo T.
TI Untangling the assembly of littoral macroinvertebrate communities
   through measures of functional and phylogenetic alpha diversity
SO FRESHWATER BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE community assembly; community ecology; environmental filtering; lakes;
   local diversity; species richness; traits
ID SPECIES-DIVERSITY; NULL MODELS; BODY-SIZE; ECOLOGY; PATTERNS; TRAITS;
   BIODIVERSITY; LAKES; VEGETATION; GRADIENT
AB Recent studies have shown that species, functional and phylogenetic diversity are related to different environmental drivers, suggesting that different aspects of alpha diversity may be complementary and may provide different information about community assembly. Such multi-facet community assembly studies are, however, rare in the freshwater realm. We examined the responses of species richness, functional alpha diversity and phylogenetic alpha diversity of littoral macroinvertebrates to environmental gradients in near-pristine boreal lakes. We also examined community assembly mechanisms using null models of functional or phylogenetic clustering, overdispersion and randomness as indications of different assembly mechanisms. We found that the alpha diversity indices examined responded differently to the underlying environmental gradients. Also, phylogenetic and functional alpha diversity indices showed different levels of overdispersion, clustering and randomness, which also varied slightly between the analyses based on abundance and presence-absence data. These results suggested that different alpha diversity indices may provide different information about overdispersion (e.g. caused by biotic interactions) and clustering (e.g. caused by environmental filtering), and emphasised the fact that most individual lakes were inhabited by species that were merely random draws from the functional or phylogenetic species pools available in the study region. Our findings suggested that some individual lakes are assembled by deterministic mechanisms, including environmental filtering and biotic interactions, whereas most individual lake macroinvertebrate communities constitute random draws from the regional species pool or are affected by the antagonistic effects of different assembly processes. Our results may stem from site-specific context dependency in the assembly mechanisms, which might also be a reason why statistical models in aquatic community studies typically explain only a small part of variation in community composition and local diversity.
RI Heino, Jani/E-6342-2010
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 0046-5070
EI 1365-2427
PD JUL
PY 2017
VL 62
IS 7
BP 1168
EP 1179
DI 10.1111/fwb.12934
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000403021500005
ER

PT J
AU Zhong, XX
   Xu, GJ
   Xu, HL
AF Zhong Xiaoxiao
   Xu Guangjian
   Xu Henglong
TI Use of multiple functional traits of protozoa for bioassessment of
   marine pollution
SO MARINE POLLUTION BULLETIN
DT Article
DE Biological trait; Functional diversity; Bioassessment; Protozoa; Marine
   pollution
ID DWELLING CILIATE COMMUNITIES; WATER-QUALITY STATUS; BENTHIC ECOSYSTEMS;
   DIVERSITY INDEXES; BIOLOGICAL TRAITS; COASTAL WATERS; BIODIVERSITY;
   ASSEMBLAGES; REDUNDANCY; FRAMEWORK
AB Ecological parameters based on multiply functional traits have many advantages for monitoring programs by reducing "signal to noise" ratios of observed species data. To identify potential indicators for bioassessment of marine pollution in function space, the functional patterns of protozoan communities and relationships with environmental changes were studied in coastal waters of the Yellow Sea during a 1-year period. The results showed that: (1) the spatial variability in functional trait distributions of the protozoa was significantly associated with changes in environmental variables, especially chemical oxygen demand (COD) and nutrients on spatial scale; (2) the functional traits, especially food resources and feeding type, were significantly correlated with COD and nutrients; and (3) the functional diversity indices were generally related to nutrients or COD. Based on the results, we suggest that the functional traits and diversity indices of protozoan communities may be used as more effective indicators for bioassessment of marine pollution. (C) 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
TC 7
Z9 7
SN 0025-326X
EI 1879-3363
PD JUN 30
PY 2017
VL 119
IS 2
BP 33
EP 38
DI 10.1016/j.marpolbul.2017.03.043
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000403985200004
PM 28359536
ER

PT J
AU Pogoreutz, C
   Radecker, N
   Cardenas, A
   Gardes, A
   Wild, C
   Voolstra, CR
AF Pogoreutz, Claudia
   Raedecker, Nils
   Cardenas, Anny
   Gaerdes, Astrid
   Wild, Christian
   Voolstra, Christian R.
TI Nitrogen Fixation Aligns with nifH Abundance and Expression in Two Coral
   Trophic Functional Groups
SO FRONTIERS IN MICROBIOLOGY
DT Article
DE coral reefs; metaorganism; symbiosis; nitrogen cycling; heterotrophy;
   autotrophy; diazotrophy; bacteria
ID RED-SEA CORAL; STYLOPHORA-PISTILLATA; SCLERACTINIAN CORALS; OCEAN
   ACIDIFICATION; SYMBIOTIC CORAL; BACTERIA; MICROBIOME; TOLERANCE;
   DIVERSITY; DIAZOTROPHS
AB Microbial nitrogen fixation (diazotrophy) is a functional trait widely associated with tropical reef-building (scleractinian) corals. While the integral role of nitrogen fixation in coral nutrient dynamics is recognized, its ecological significance across different coral functional groups remains yet to be evaluated. Here we set out to compare molecular and physiological patterns of diazotrophy (i.e., nifH gene abundance and expression as well as nitrogen fixation rates) in two coral families with contrasting trophic strategies: highly heterotrophic, free-living members of the family Fungiidae (Pleuractis granulosa, Ctenactis echinata), and mostly autotrophic coral holobionts with low heterotrophic capacity (Pocilloporidae: Pocillopora verrucosa, Stylophora pistillata). The Fungiidae exhibited low diazotroph abundance (based on nifH gene copy numbers) and activity (based on nifH gene expression and the absence of detectable nitrogen fixation rates). In contrast, the mostly autotrophic Pocilloporidae exhibited nifH gene copy numbers and gene expression two orders of magnitude higher than in the Fungiidae, which coincided with detectable nitrogen fixation activity. Based on these data, we suggest that nitrogen fixation compensates for the low heterotrophic nitrogen uptake in autotrophic corals. Consequently, the ecological importance of diazotrophy in coral holobionts may be determined by the trophic functional group of the host.
OI Radecker, Nils/0000-0002-2387-8567; Voolstra, Christian
   R./0000-0003-4555-3795
TC 5
Z9 6
SN 1664-302X
PD JUN 28
PY 2017
VL 8
AR 1187
DI 10.3389/fmicb.2017.01187
SC Microbiology
UT WOS:000404329100001
PM 28702013
ER

PT J
AU Hardy, N
   Berry, T
   Kelaher, BP
   Goldsworthy, SD
   Bunce, M
   Coleman, MA
   Gillanders, BM
   Connell, SD
   Blewitt, M
   Figueira, W
AF Hardy, Natasha
   Berry, Tina
   Kelaher, Brendan P.
   Goldsworthy, Simon D.
   Bunce, Michael
   Coleman, Melinda A.
   Gillanders, Bronwyn M.
   Connell, Sean D.
   Blewitt, Michelle
   Figueira, Will
TI Assessing the trophic ecology of top predators across a recolonisation
   frontier using DNA metabarcoding of diets
SO MARINE ECOLOGY PROGRESS SERIES
DT Article
DE DNA metabarcoding; Trophic ecology; Predator-prey interactions;
   Recolonisation; Fur seals; Arctocephalus forsteri; Arctocephalus
   pusillus doriferus; Otariid
ID AUSTRALIAN FUR SEALS; NEW-ZEALAND; PREY DNA; FOOD-WEBS; REEF FISH;
   HABITAT; TOOL; POPULATION; DIGESTION; STRATEGY
AB Top predator populations, once intensively hunted, are rebounding in size and geographic distribution. The cessation of sealing along coastal Australia and subsequent recovery of Australian Arctocephalus pusillus doriferus and long-nosed A. forsteri fur seals represents a unique opportunity to investigate trophic linkages at a frontier of predator recolonisation. We characterised the diets of both species across 2 locations of recolonisation, one site an established breeding colony, and the other, a new but permanent haul-out site. Using DNA metabarcoding, high taxonomic resolution data on diets was used to inform ecological trait-based analyses across time and location. Australian and long-nosed fur seals consumed 76 and 73 prey taxa, respectively, a prey diversity greater than previously reported. We found unexpected overlap of prey functional traits in the diets of both seal species at the haul-out site, where we observed strong trophic linkages with coastal ecosystems due to the prevalence of benthic, demersal and reef-associated prey. The diets of both seal species at the breeding colony were consistent with for aging patterns observed in the centre of their geographic range regarding diet partitioning between predator species and seasonal trends typically observed. The unexpected differences between sites in this region and the convergence of both predators' effective ecological roles at the range-edge haul-out site correlate with known differences in seal population densities and demographics at these and other newly recolonised locations. This study provides a baseline for the diets and trophic interactions for recovering fur seal populations and from which to understand the evolving ecology of predator recolonisation.
RI Kelaher, Brendan/P-3647-2017
OI Kelaher, Brendan/0000-0002-7505-4412; Figueira,
   Will/0000-0001-9472-8710; Berry, Tina/0000-0002-7203-2437; Connell,
   Sean/0000-0002-5350-6852
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0171-8630
EI 1616-1599
PD JUN 21
PY 2017
VL 573
BP 237
EP 254
DI 10.3354/meps12165
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology;
   Oceanography
UT WOS:000404123900019
ER

PT J
AU Baert, JM
   De Laender, F
   Janssen, CR
AF Baert, Jan M.
   De Laender, Frederik
   Janssen, Colin R.
TI The Consequences of Nonrandomness in Species-Sensitivity in Relation to
   Functional Traits for Ecosystem-Level Effects of Chemicals
SO ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY
DT Article
ID ECOLOGICAL RISK-ASSESSMENT; STATISTICAL INEVITABILITY; HAZARDOUS
   CONCENTRATIONS; COMMUNITY ECOLOGY; FOOD-WEB; BIODIVERSITY;
   DISTRIBUTIONS; EXTRAPOLATION; SERVICES; DENSITY
AB Estimating ecosystem-level effects from single species bioassays is a major challenge in environmental risk assessment. Most extrapolation procedures are based on the implicit assumption that species sensitivities are random with regard to their functional traits. Here, we explore how nonrandomness in species sensitivities affects how species-level and ecosystem level effects of chemical exposure correspond. The effect of a correlation between the trait value under control conditions and the sensitivity of the trait to chemical stress is studied for two traits (per capita growth rate and monoculture yield) under constant and temporary exposure. Theoretical model predictions are thereby validated against a 3-week microcosm experiment, in which eight marine diatoms systems with different correlations between trait values and sensitivities were temporary (1 week) or constantly (3 weeks) exposed to two concentrations of the herbicide atrazine (100 and 250 mu g L-1). Negative correlations increased the reduction in ecosystem functioning (productivity) by atrazine for both traits. However, correlations in the per capita growth rate affected productivity only shortly following changes in environmental conditions, whereas correlations in the monoculture yield affected productivity throughout exposure. Correlations between species sensitivities and functional trait values can thus help to identify when ecosystem-level effects are likely to exceed species-level effects.
OI Baert, Jan/0000-0002-8640-043X
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0013-936X
EI 1520-5851
PD JUN 20
PY 2017
VL 51
IS 12
BP 7228
EP 7235
DI 10.1021/acs.est.7b00527
SC Engineering; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000404087400065
PM 28489350
ER

PT J
AU Bates, AE
   Stuart-Smith, RD
   Barrett, NS
   Edgar, GJ
AF Bates, Amanda E.
   Stuart-Smith, Rick D.
   Barrett, Neville S.
   Edgar, Graham J.
TI Biological interactions both facilitate and resist climate-related
   functional change in temperate reef communities
SO PROCEEDINGS OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY B-BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES
DT Article
DE climate change; community temperature index; functional traits; marine
   protected area; tropicalization
ID RANGE SHIFTS; PROTECTED AREAS; MARINE; FEATURES; TRENDS; SCALE
AB Shifts in the abundance and location of species are restructuring life on the Earth, presenting the need to build resilience into our natural systems. Here, we tested if protection from fishing promotes community resilience in temperate reef communities undergoing rapid warming in Tasmania. Regardless of protection status, we detected a signature of warming in the brown macroalgae, invertebrates and fishes, through increases in the local richness and abundance of warm-affinity species. Even so, responses in protected communities diverged from exploited communities. At the local scale, the number of cool-affinity fishes and canopy-forming algal species increased following protection, even though the observation window fell within a period of warming. At the same time, exploited communities gained turf algal and sessile invertebrate species. We further found that the recovery of predator populations following protection leads to marked declines in mobile invertebrates this trend could be incorrectly attributed to warming without contextual data quantifying community change across trophic levels. By comparing long-term change in exploited and protected reefs, we empirically demonstrate the role of biological interactions in both facilitating and resisting climate-related biodiversity change. We further highlight the potential for trophic interactions to alter the progression of both range expansions and contractions.
RI Shen, ChengHan/D-1972-2018
OI Edgar, Graham/0000-0003-0833-9001; Bates, Amanda/0000-0002-0198-4537
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 0962-8452
EI 1471-2954
PD JUN 14
PY 2017
VL 284
IS 1856
AR 20170484
DI 10.1098/rspb.2017.0484
SC Life Sciences & Biomedicine - Other Topics; Environmental Sciences &
   Ecology; Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000405955300012
PM 28592671
ER

PT J
AU Banks, JE
   Jackson, CHW
   Gagic, V
   Baya, A
   Ngala, D
AF Banks, J. E.
   Jackson, C. H. W.
   Gagic, V.
   Baya, A.
   Ngala, D.
TI Differential Responses of Bird Species to Habitat Condition in a Coastal
   Kenyan Forest Reserve: Implications for Conservation
SO TROPICAL CONSERVATION SCIENCE
DT Article
DE bird conservation; East Africa; foraging; forest habitat; Loxodonta
ID ARABUKO-SOKOKE FOREST; SHEPPARDIA-GUNNINGI-SOKOKENSIS; ELEPHANT
   LOXODONTA-AFRICANA; FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; AFROTROPICAL THRUSH; ECOSYSTEM
   SERVICES; SOUTH-AFRICA; BIODIVERSITY; SURROGATE; FRAGMENTATION
AB The management of assemblages of species across many taxa is a common concern in conservation. Consequently, the use of one or a few surrogate or indicator species to represent an entire assemblage has become an increasingly important tool in conservation science. However, conservation schemes based on the needs of one or two focal species often fail to account for individualistic responses of larger assemblages of species. Data from bird point counts along with vegetation characteristics from a coastal tropical dry forest in Kenya that is subject to elephant disturbance were used to explore the differential responses of bird species to environmental conditions in a forest reserve where wildlife management includes both endangered birds and mammals. Results revealed that even birds with similar foraging habits had idiosyncratic responses to both environmental traits and elephant disturbance. While overall species responded to important characteristics such as percent canopy cover and leaf litter depth, individualistic responses of different species trait diversity defied easy characterization of optimal forest management schemes. Taken together, our analyses highlight the difficulty in basing the development of management plans for entire assemblages of species on the response of a single or a few species. Implications for wildlife conservation in Arabuko-Sokoke Forest and similar forest reserves are discussed, emphasizing the need for a better understanding of individual species' responses to forest conditions.
TC 0
Z9 1
SN 1940-0829
PD JUN 8
PY 2017
VL 10
DI 10.1177/1940082917713013
SC Biodiversity & Conservation
UT WOS:000409537500001
ER

PT J
AU Garcia-Rogers, EM
AF Garcia-Rogers, Eduardo M.
TI Benthic invertebrate community structure and biological traits along a
   flow intermittence gradient in a Mediterranean stream
SO FUNDAMENTAL AND APPLIED LIMNOLOGY
DT Article
DE aquatic regimes; biological traits; community structure; functional beta
   diversity; taxonomical beta diversity; temporary streams
ID HEADWATER STREAMS; AQUATIC INVERTEBRATES; ECOSYSTEM EXPANSION; SPECIES
   ASSEMBLAGES; TEMPORARY RIVERS; BETA DIVERSITY; NEW-ZEALAND; CLIMATE;
   MACROINVERTEBRATES; PERMANENCE
AB Mediterranean streams exhibit highly variable inter-annual and seasonal discharge patterns, exerting an evolutionary pressure that constrains biological communities. Due to climate change, including a decrease in summer rainfall, and concurrent water resource pressures, stream intermittence is increasing in the Mediterranean Basin. In this context, I explored the potential of benthic invertebrate taxa and their biological traits to be used as indicators of different hydrological conditions. I characterized the flow intermittence gradient along a small Mediterranean stream into three aquatic regimes: perennial (P), intermittent with summer pools (IP), and intermittent with dry channels (ID). Then, I compared the performance of taxonomic and trait-based approaches in characterizing the effects of flow intermittence on benthic invertebrate community patterns in two sampling periods: (1) during the flowing period, when pool-riffle sequences were well-established, and (2) during the dry phase, when either isolated pools or dry channels occurred at the intermittent sites. Both the taxonomic and trait composition of communities differed among sites according to their aquatic regime, especially ID sites, which differed considerably from P and IP sites. Organisms from ID sites were characterized by life-history adaptations to flow intermittence (e.g. short life cycles, resistant forms). No significant difference in traits or taxa was observed between P and IP sites in either sampling period. The trait-based approach was a more sensitive indicator of the aquatic regime, emphasizing the need to conduct further research into the development of trait-based biomonitoring and conservation tools for intermittent streams.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1863-9135
PD JUN
PY 2017
VL 190
IS 2
BP 117
EP 132
DI 10.1127/fal/2017/0984
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000407540900003
ER

PT J
AU Frederich, B
   Santini, F
   Konow, N
   Schnitzler, J
   Lecchini, D
   Alfaro, ME
AF Frederich, Bruno
   Santini, Francesco
   Konow, Nicolai
   Schnitzler, Joseph
   Lecchini, David
   Alfaro, Michael E.
TI Body shape convergence driven by small size optimum in marine
   angelfishes
SO BIOLOGY LETTERS
DT Article
DE miniaturization; trait evolution; morphospace; Ornstein-Uhlenbeck;
   SURFACE; Pomacanthidae
ID EVOLUTION; MODELS; MINIATURIZATION; PERFORMANCE
AB Convergent evolution of small body size occurs across many vertebrate clades and may reflect an evolutionary response to shared selective pressures. However it remains unclear if other aspects of phenotype undergo convergent evolution in miniaturized lineages. Here we present a comparative analysis of body size and shape evolution in marine angelfishes (Pomacanthidae), a reef fish family characterized by repeated transitions to small body size. We ask if lineages that evolve small sizes show convergent evolution in body shape. Our results reveal that angelfish lineages evolved three different stable size optima with one corresponding to the group of pygmy angelfishes (Centropyge). Then, we test if the observed shifts in body size are associated with changes to new adaptive peaks in shape. Our data suggest that independent evolution to small size optima have induced repeated convergence upon deeper body and steeper head profile in Centropyge. These traits may favour manoeuvrability and visual awareness in these cryptic species living among corals, illustrating that functional demands on small size may be related to habitat specialization and predator avoidance. The absence of shape convergence in large marine angelfishes also suggests that more severe requirements exist for small than for large size optima.
OI Frederich, Bruno/0000-0003-3438-0243; Alfaro,
   Michael/0000-0002-8898-8230
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 1744-9561
EI 1744-957X
PD JUN
PY 2017
VL 13
IS 6
AR 20170154
DI 10.1098/rsbl.2017.0154
SC Life Sciences & Biomedicine - Other Topics; Environmental Sciences &
   Ecology; Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000406896100006
PM 28615351
ER

PT J
AU Stoker, D
   Falkner, AJ
   Murray, KM
   Lang, AK
   Barnum, TR
   Hepinstall-Cymerman, J
   Conroy, MJ
   Cooper, RJ
   Pringle, CM
AF Stoker, David
   Falkner, Amber J.
   Murray, Kelly M.
   Lang, Ashley K.
   Barnum, Thomas R.
   Hepinstall-Cymerman, Jeffrey
   Conroy, Michael J.
   Cooper, Robert J.
   Pringle, Catherine M.
TI Decomposition of terrestrial resource subsidies in headwater streams:
   Does consumer diversity matter?
SO ECOSPHERE
DT Article
DE aquatic ecology; biodiversity and ecosystem functioning; Coweeta
   Hydrologic Laboratory; North Carolina; USA; detritus; functional
   diversity; structural equation modeling; terrestrial-aquatic linkage
ID FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; COMMUNITY COMPOSITION; ECOSYSTEM FUNCTION;
   SPECIES-DIVERSITY; PLANT-COMMUNITIES; ORGANIC-MATTER; FOOD-WEB;
   BREAKDOWN; ECOLOGY; DYNAMICS
AB Resource subsidies and biodiversity are essential for maintaining community structure and ecosystem functioning, but the relative importance of consumer diversity and resource characteristics to decomposition remains unclear. Forested headwater streams are detritus-based systems, dependent on leaf litter inputs from adjacent riparian ecosystems, and decomposition of these resources is an important ecosystem function. Here, we examined the effects of consumer community diversity on leaf decomposition in a reciprocal transplant experiment. We asked (1) whether stream consumer communities are adapted to local resources and (2) how functional trait diversity among communities affects the leaf decomposition process. We did not find evidence that communities were adapted to locally derived resource subsidies. Instead, we found that consumer biomass and functional trait diversity as well as resource characteristics were the primary biotic drivers of decomposition. Consumer biomass was stimulated by specific resource subsidies, leading to direct and indirect effects of resource subsidies on ecosystem functioning. Contrary to current theory, we show that decomposition was higher with decreased detritivore functional diversity, suggesting dominant traits encompassing a specific niche increased decomposition. We also show that top-down, consumer diversity effects can be equal in magnitude to the bottom- up effects of resource characteristics during the decomposition process. Our research illustrates the importance of considering multiple biotic and abiotic drivers interacting via multiple pathways to affect a crucial ecosystem function.
OI Lang, Ashley/0000-0002-6080-1681; Murray-Stoker,
   David/0000-0002-4774-6948
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 2150-8925
PD JUN
PY 2017
VL 8
IS 6
AR e01868
DI 10.1002/ecs2.1868
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000405626700026
ER

PT J
AU Bao, YJ
   Xu, ZX
   Li, Y
   Yao, Z
   Sun, JB
   Song, H
AF Bao, Yun-Juan
   Xu, Zixiang
   Li, Yang
   Yao, Zhi
   Sun, Jibin
   Song, Hui
TI High-throughput metagenomic analysis of petroleum-contaminated soil
   microbiome reveals the versatility in xenobiotic aromatics metabolism
SO JOURNAL OF ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCES
DT Article
DE Comparative genomics; Metagenomic sequencing; Taxonomic analysis;
   Oil-contaminated soils
ID OCEAN SAMPLING EXPEDITION; GUT MICROBIOME; PROTEIN FAMILIES; GENOMIC
   ANALYSIS; COMMUNITY; DIVERSITY; DISCOVERY; BIODEGRADATION;
   BIOREMEDIATION; DEGRADATION
AB The soil with petroleum contamination is one of the most studied soil ecosystems due to its rich microorganisms for hydrocarbon degradation and broad applications in bioremediation. However, our understanding of the genomic properties and functional traits of the soil microbiome is limited. In this study, we used high-throughput metagenomic sequencing to comprehensively study the microbial community from petroleum-contaminated soils near Tianjin Dagang oilfield in eastern China. The analysis reveals that the soil metagenome is characterized by high level of community diversity andmetabolic versatility. Themetageome community is predominated by gamma-Proteobacteria and alpha-Proteobacteria, which are key players for petroleumhydrocarbon degradation. The functional study demonstrates over-represented enzyme groups and pathways involved in degradation of a broad set of xenobiotic aromatic compounds, including toluene, xylene, chlorobenzoate, aminobenzoate, DDT, methylnaphthalene, and bisphenol. A composite metabolic network is proposed for the identified pathways, thus consolidating our identification of the pathways. The overall data demonstrated the great potential of the studied soil microbiome in the xenobiotic aromatics degradation. The results not only establish a rich reservoir for novel enzyme discovery but also provide putative applications in bioremediation. (C) 2016 The Research Center for Eco-Environmental Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences. Published by Elsevier B.V.
OI Sun, Jibin/0000-0002-0208-504X
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 1001-0742
EI 1878-7320
PD JUN
PY 2017
VL 56
BP 25
EP 35
DI 10.1016/j.jes.2016.08.022
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000404127500003
PM 28571861
ER

PT J
AU Hehemann, JH
   Truong, LV
   Unfried, F
   Welsch, N
   Kabisch, J
   Heiden, SE
   Junker, S
   Becher, D
   Thurmer, A
   Daniel, R
   Amann, R
   Schweder, T
AF Hehemann, Jan-Hendrik
   Le Van Truong
   Unfried, Frank
   Welsch, Norma
   Kabisch, Johannes
   Heiden, Stefan E.
   Junker, Sabryna
   Becher, Doerte
   Thuermer, Andrea
   Daniel, Rolf
   Amann, Rudolf
   Schweder, Thomas
TI Aquatic adaptation of a laterally acquired pectin degradation pathway in
   marine gammaproteobacteria
SO ENVIRONMENTAL MICROBIOLOGY
DT Article
ID MULTIPLE SEQUENCE ALIGNMENT; CARBOHYDRATE-ACTIVE ENZYMES;
   ERWINIA-CHRYSANTHEMI; PHYLOGENETIC ANALYSIS; CELLVIBRIO-JAPONICUS;
   PECTATE LYASE; GENE-TRANSFER; GENOME; PROTEIN; BACTERIUM
AB Mobile genomic islands distribute functional traits between microbes and habitats, yet it remains unclear how their proteins adapt to new environments. Here we used a comparative phylogenomic and proteomic approach to show that the marine bacterium Pseudoalteromonas haloplanktis ANT/505 acquired a genomic island with a functional pathway for pectin catabolism. Bioinformatics and biochemical experiments revealed that this pathway encodes a series of carbohydrate-active enzymes including two multimodular pectate lyases, PelA and PelB. PelA is a large enzyme with a polysaccharide lyase family 1 (PL1) domain and a carbohydrate esterase family 8 domain, and PelB contains a PL1 domain and two carbohydrate-binding domains of family 13. Comparative phylogenomic analyses indicate that the pathway was most likely acquired from terrestrial microbes, yet we observed multi-modular orthologues only in marine bacteria. Proteomic experiments showed that P. haloplanktis ANT/505 secretes both pectate lyases into the environment in the presence of pectin. These multi-modular enzymes may therefore represent a marine innovation that enhances physical interaction with pectins to reduce loss of substrate and enzymes by diffusion. Our results revealed that marine bacteria can catabolize pectin, and highlight enzyme fusion as a potential adaptation that may facilitate microbial consumption of polymeric substrates in aquatic environments.
RI Amann, Rudolf/C-6534-2014
OI Amann, Rudolf/0000-0002-0846-7372; Daniel, Rolf/0000-0002-8646-7925;
   Hehemann, Jan-Hendrik/0000-0002-8700-2564; Unfried,
   Frank/0000-0002-9304-4947; Schweder, Thomas/0000-0002-7213-3596
TC 8
Z9 8
SN 1462-2912
EI 1462-2920
PD JUN
PY 2017
VL 19
IS 6
SI SI
BP 2320
EP 2333
DI 10.1111/1462-2920.13726
SC Microbiology
UT WOS:000404007700019
PM 28276126
ER

PT J
AU Whitney, JE
   Whittier, JB
   Paukert, CP
   Olden, JD
   Strecker, AL
AF Whitney, James E.
   Whittier, Joanna B.
   Paukert, Craig P.
   Olden, Julian D.
   Strecker, Angela L.
TI Forecasted range shifts of arid-land fishes in response to climate
   change
SO REVIEWS IN FISH BIOLOGY AND FISHERIES
DT Article
DE Climate change; Imperiled fish; Nonnative fish; Range shifts; Rivers;
   Trait-based approach
ID COLORADO RIVER-BASIN; FRESH-WATER FISHES; ADAPTIVE REGRESSION SPLINES;
   SPECIES TRAITS; PHYLOGENETIC CONSERVATISM; POTENTIAL IMPACTS; HABITAT
   MODELS; DISTRIBUTIONS; DIVERSITY; MARINE
AB Climate change is poised to alter the distributional limits, center, and size of many species. Traits may influence different aspects of range shifts, with trophic generality facilitating shifts at the leading edge, and greater thermal tolerance limiting contractions at the trailing edge. The generality of relationships between traits and range shifts remains ambiguous however, especially for imperiled fishes residing in xeric riverscapes. Our objectives were to quantify contemporary fish distributions in the Lower Colorado River Basin, forecast climate change by 2085 using two general circulation models, and quantify shifts in the limits, center, and size of fish elevational ranges according to fish traits. We examined relationships among traits and range shift metrics either singly using univariate linear modeling or combined with multivariate redundancy analysis. We found that trophic and dispersal traits were associated with shifts at the leading and trailing edges, respectively, although projected range shifts were largely unexplained by traits. As expected, piscivores and omnivores with broader diets shifted upslope most at the leading edge while more specialized invertivores exhibited minimal changes. Fishes that were more mobile shifted upslope most at the trailing edge, defying predictions. No traits explained changes in range center or size. Finally, current preference explained multivariate range shifts, as fishes with faster current preferences exhibited smaller multivariate changes. Although range shifts were largely unexplained by traits, more specialized invertivorous fishes with lower dispersal propensity or greater current preference may require the greatest conservation efforts because of their limited capacity to shift ranges under climate change.
OI Strecker, Angela/0000-0001-9387-1654; Whittier,
   Joanna/0000-0002-1048-9490; Paukert, Craig/0000-0002-9369-8545
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0960-3166
EI 1573-5184
PD JUN
PY 2017
VL 27
IS 2
SI SI
BP 463
EP 479
DI 10.1007/s11160-017-9479-9
SC Fisheries; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000403533200010
ER

PT J
AU Parisi, MG
   Lentini, A
   Cammarata, M
AF Parisi, Maria Giovanna
   Lentini, Alessandro
   Cammarata, Matteo
TI Seasonal changes in morpho-functional aspects of two Anemonia sulcata
   (Pennant, 1777) wild populations
SO MARINE BIODIVERSITY
DT Article
DE Anemonia sulcata; Biondicator; Seasonal variation; Thermal stress;
   Hydrolase; Peroxidase; Biometry
ID FRESH-WATER PLANARIANS; RAPID CLIMATE-CHANGE; OXIDATIVE STRESS;
   STYELA-PLICATA; CORAL-REEFS; TEMPERATURE; ADAPTATION; BIOMARKERS;
   ANTHOZOA; ESTERASE
AB Marine benthic organisms can be used as indicators of the quality of environmental status and as monitoring tools to detect natural or anthropogenic perturbations. In temperate waters, metabolic and biochemical responses may be governed by physiological changes driven by seasonal factors. Gathering baseline information on the mechanisms underlying seasonal acclimation patterns is therefore a critical step towards the understanding of the physiological responses of biological indicators. In poikilothermic metazoans, the production of regulatory metabolic enzymes can be used as tools for deciphering the acclimation potential. The aim of this study was to characterize the natural seasonal variability in biometric traits and enzymatic biomarkers over a 12-month period in the sea anemone, Anemonia sulcata (Anthozoa, Cnidaria), from two areas with different environmental and anthropic impacts. Seasonality and site factors affected enzymatic kinetics at tentacle levels, while seasonality, site and biometrical characteristics modulated the same enzymes in the body column of A. sulcata. The results showed a decrease in enzymatic activity in summer and an increased synthesis of enzymes in the late fall and winter months. The interaction between biometric features and temperature appeared significant for mesolittoral sea anemones but not for infralittoral specimens. This study showed seasonal patterns of variations of biochemical responses in A. sulcata, suggesting that this species, an abundant member of shallow rocky bottom communities in temperate European seas, may represent a sensitive bio-indicator organism worth considering for further ecological studies on climate change as well as for environmental monitoring programs.
OI CAMMARATA, Matteo/0000-0002-5497-1246
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1867-1616
EI 1867-1624
PD JUN
PY 2017
VL 47
IS 2
BP 561
EP 573
DI 10.1007/s12526-017-0695-2
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000403061500033
ER

PT J
AU Ye, C
   Chen, CR
   Du, M
   Liu, WZ
   Zhang, QF
AF Ye, Chen
   Chen, Chengrong
   Du, Ming
   Liu, Wenzhi
   Zhang, Quanfa
TI Revegetation affects soil denitrifying communities in a riparian ecotone
SO ECOLOGICAL ENGINEERING
DT Article
DE Denitrification; Denitrifiers; Community composition; Abundance;
   Terrestrial-aquatic ecotone
ID LEVEL-FLUCTUATION ZONE; 3 GORGES RESERVOIR; NITROGEN DYNAMICS;
   DENITRIFICATION RATES; GENE DIVERSITY; N2O EMISSIONS; WATER; WETLANDS;
   CHINA; BACTERIAL
AB Denitrification is one of the most important processes in the nitrogen (N) cycle due to its permanently removing excess N from ecosystems into the atmosphere. In practice, revegetation has employed to facilitate the process for preventing nitrogen from terrestrial into aquatic ecosystems, in particular in the terrestrial-aquatic ecotone (i.e., riparian zone). However, how revegetation drives the shift in the denitrifying bacterial community and consequently alters denitrification is still unclear. In this study, we investigated soil denitrifiers in three vegetation types with respective dominant species of trees, shrubs and herbs in the water-level-fluctuate-zone in the Three Gorges Reservoir, China. We hypothesized that revegetation affected the composition of denitrifiers. Results revealed that the functional gene composition in herb samples was well separated from that in tree samples, which was dependent on the interactions between plant traits (i.e., species number and diversity, root C:N ratio) and environmental factors (i.e., soil temperature and pH). Herb soils has more abundance of nirS and nirK genes and nirS gene diversity due to their higher species number, soil pH, soil organic C, TN, soil C: N ratio and root C: N ratio compared with the shrub and tree soils. Vegetation types did not significantly affect soil denitrification rate, which could be largely explained by the combined effects of plant attributes (species number, root organic C and root N), and soil pH. Our results have demonstrated that herb plantations could increase the abundance of soil denitrifiers through altering both the quantity and quality of SOC and soil pH. (C) 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
RI Zhang, Quanfa/H-1922-2011; Soil Microbiome, China-CSMI/D-1230-2018
OI chen, chengrong/0000-0001-6377-4001
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 0925-8574
EI 1872-6992
PD JUN
PY 2017
VL 103
BP 256
EP 263
DI 10.1016/j.ecoleng.2017.03.005
PN A
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Engineering
UT WOS:000402830200028
ER

PT J
AU Pap, PL
   Vincze, O
   Wekerle, B
   Daubner, T
   Vagasi, CI
   Nudds, RL
   Dyke, GJ
   Osvath, G
AF Pap, Peter L.
   Vincze, Orsolya
   Wekerle, Beatrix
   Daubner, Timea
   Vagasi, Csongor I.
   Nudds, Robert L.
   Dyke, Gareth J.
   Osvath, Gergely
TI A phylogenetic comparative analysis reveals correlations between body
   feather structure and habitat
SO FUNCTIONAL ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE body feathers; feather lengths; functional morphology; thermal
   insulation; vane density; water repellence
ID DIVING GREAT CORMORANTS; SAMPLE-SIZE; PASSER-DOMESTICUS; CONTOUR
   FEATHERS; SEASONAL-CHANGES; BIRDS; PLUMAGE; QUALITY; WATER; WETTABILITY
AB Body feathers ensure both waterproofing and insulation in waterbirds, but how natural variation in the morphological properties of these appendages relates to environmental constraints remains largely unexplored. Here, we test how habitat and thermal condition affect the morphology of body feathers, using a phylogenetic comparative analysis of five structural traits [i.e., total feather length, the lengths of the pennaceous (distal) and plumulaceous (proximal) sections, barb density, and pennaceous barbule density] from a sample of 194 European bird species. Body feather total length is shorter in aquatic than in terrestrial birds, and this difference between groups is due to the shorter plumulaceous feather section in aquatic birds. Indeed, a reduced plumulaceous section in feather length probably reflects the need to limit air trapped in the plumage to adjust the buoyancy of aquatic birds. In contrast, the high pennaceous barbule density of aquatic birds compared to their terrestrial counterparts reflects water resistance of the plumage in contact with water. Our results show that birds living in environments with low ambient temperature have long plumulaceous feather lengths, low barb density, and low pennaceous barbule density. Data also suggest that plumage probably has limited function in reducing the heat absorption of species living in hot environments. Our results have broad implications for understanding the suite of selection pressures driving the evolution of body feather functional morphology. It remains to be tested, however, how other feather traits, such as the density of plumage (feathers per unit area) and the relative number of different feather types, for example downy feathers, are distributed amongst birds with different water resistance and thermoinsulative needs.
   A is available for this article.
OI Vagasi, Csongor I./0000-0002-8736-2391
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 0269-8463
EI 1365-2435
PD JUN
PY 2017
VL 31
IS 6
BP 1241
EP 1251
DI 10.1111/1365-2435.12820
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000402642900008
ER

PT J
AU Fay, R
   Barbraud, C
   Delord, K
   Weimerskirch, H
AF Fay, Remi
   Barbraud, Christophe
   Delord, Karine
   Weimerskirch, Henri
TI Contrasting effects of climate and population density over time and life
   stages in a long-lived seabird
SO FUNCTIONAL ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE Diomedea exulans; early-life vital rate; juvenile survival; long-term
   effect; recruitment age
ID SOUTHERN ANNULAR MODE; WANDERING ALBATROSS; ENVIRONMENTAL VARIABILITY;
   BREEDING PERFORMANCE; JUVENILE SURVIVAL; DIOMEDEA-EXULANS; RECAPTURE
   MODELS; LARGE HERBIVORES; ATLANTIC PUFFIN; PELAGIC SEABIRD
AB Although population responses to environmental variability have been extensively studied for many organisms, few studies have considered early-life stages owing to the inherent difficulties in tracking the fate of young individuals. However, young individuals are expected to be more sensitive to environmental stochasticity owing to their inexperience and lower competitive abilities. Thus, they are keys to understand demographic responses of an age-structured population to environmental variability. In this study, we used capture-recapture modelling, based on a 49year-long individual-based longitudinal monitoring dataset, to investigate climatic and population density effects on immature demographic parameters in a long-lived seabird, the wandering albatross. We provide evidence that climate and population size affected both survival and recruitment age of young individuals although in different ways according to the trait. We found that early-life survival was mainly affected by population density, whereas recruitment age variation appeared to be better explained by climatic conditions, with a surprising long-term effect of climate. While population size explained 60% of the variation in juvenile survival, the average Southern Annular Mode over the five previous years explained 52% of variation in recruitment age. In addition, although early-life survival was consistently negatively affected by population size, the relationship between recruitment age and population size shifted from negative to positive over time from the 1970s to 2000s, showing that density dependence mechanisms can temporarily disappear. Finally, we found that similar climatic conditions may affect individual performances in opposite ways according to the life stage of individuals. This result underlines the critical need to assess age-specific functional responses to environmental variability to allow accurate demographic predictions. By revealing the poorly known demographic process of younger age classes, the results of this study improve our understanding of population dynamics of long-lived marine species.
   A is available for this article.
TC 8
Z9 8
SN 0269-8463
EI 1365-2435
PD JUN
PY 2017
VL 31
IS 6
BP 1275
EP 1284
DI 10.1111/1365-2435.12831
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000402642900011
PM 28781406
ER

PT J
AU Darling, ES
   Graham, NAJ
   Januchowski-Hartley, FA
   Nash, KL
   Pratchett, MS
   Wilson, SK
AF Darling, Emily S.
   Graham, Nicholas A. J.
   Januchowski-Hartley, Fraser A.
   Nash, Kirsty L.
   Pratchett, Morgan S.
   Wilson, Shaun K.
TI Relationships between structural complexity, coral traits, and reef fish
   assemblages
SO CORAL REEFS
DT Article
DE Habitat diversity; Species traits; Functional ecology; Reef
   architecture; Scleractinian corals; Coral reef fish
ID HABITAT COMPLEXITY; OCEAN ACIDIFICATION; MARINE RESERVES; ECOSYSTEMS;
   DIVERSITY; COMMUNITY; FISHERIES; LIFE; VULNERABILITY; BIODIVERSITY
AB With the ongoing loss of coral cover and the associated flattening of reef architecture, understanding the links between coral habitat and reef fishes is of critical importance. Here, we investigate whether considering coral traits and functional diversity provides new insights into the relationship between structural complexity and reef fish communities, and whether coral traits and community composition can predict structural complexity. Across 157 sites in Seychelles, Maldives, the Chagos Archipelago, and Australia's Great Barrier Reef, we find that structural complexity and reef zone are the strongest and most consistent predictors of reef fish abundance, biomass, species richness, and trophic structure. However, coral traits, diversity, and life histories provided additional predictive power for models of reef fish assemblages, and were key drivers of structural complexity. Our findings highlight that reef complexity relies on living corals-with different traits and life histories-continuing to build carbonate skeletons, and that these nuanced relationships between coral assemblages and habitat complexity can affect the structure of reef fish assemblages. Seascape-level estimates of structural complexity are rapid and cost effective with important implications for the structure and function of fish assemblages, and should be incorporated into monitoring programs.
RI Graham, Nicholas/C-8360-2014; Nash, Kirsty/B-5456-2015
OI Graham, Nicholas/0000-0002-0304-7467; Nash, Kirsty/0000-0003-0976-3197;
   Wilson, Shaun/0000-0002-4590-0948; Darling, Emily/0000-0002-1048-2838;
   Januchowski-Hartley, Fraser/0000-0003-2468-8199
TC 20
Z9 20
SN 0722-4028
EI 1432-0975
PD JUN
PY 2017
VL 36
IS 2
BP 561
EP 575
DI 10.1007/s00338-017-1539-z
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000401627400020
ER

PT J
AU Luiza-Andrade, A
   Montag, LFD
   Juen, L
AF Luiza-Andrade, Ana
   de Assis Montag, Luciano Fogaca
   Juen, Leandro
TI Functional diversity in studies of aquatic macroinvertebrates community
SO SCIENTOMETRICS
DT Article
DE Functional traits; Freshwater; Macroinvertebrates; Scientometrics
ID DIFFERENT SPATIAL SCALES; LARGE EUROPEAN RIVERS; BIOLOGICAL TRAITS;
   BENTHIC MACROINVERTEBRATES; ECOSYSTEM PROCESSES; INVERTEBRATE TRAITS;
   HEADWATER STREAMS; CURRENT KNOWLEDGE; ECOLOGY; BIODIVERSITY
AB We have compiled information from scientific articles from the ISI Web of Knowledge database (Thomson Reuters) to monitor trends and identify gaps in the use of functional diversity in studies of macroinvertebrates in stream ecosystems. We identified regions, periodicals, taxa and set of functional traits, which were more frequently used. The use of functional diversity with stream macroinvertebrates has proved to be recent, intended to answer the negative effects of land use on the community, especially of aquatic insects and mainly distributed in the European and North American continents. The meaning of terms used in the functional approach differ from concepts found in earlier studies, which may cause misunderstandings in interpretations and comparisons between articles. In addition to this issue, absence of species lists and functional values, and the combination of binary or continuous data and different taxonomic levels also hinder these comparisons. The standardization of terminology has been proposed previously and would simplify the use of functional traits, facilitating the understanding and the search for articles. We highlight the need for funding agencies to determine measures that force researchers to provide the databases after a certain period of time, thus contributing to the creation of a database in other continents, as has been occurring especially in Europe. Such initiative strengthens research, especially those distributed in areas undergoing intense human pressure.
RI Montag, Luciano/I-1485-2012
OI Montag, Luciano/0000-0001-9370-6747; Luiza-Andrade,
   Ana/0000-0001-7748-067X
TC 1
Z9 3
SN 0138-9130
EI 1588-2861
PD JUN
PY 2017
VL 111
IS 3
BP 1643
EP 1656
DI 10.1007/s11192-017-2315-0
SC Computer Science; Information Science & Library Science
UT WOS:000401747900020
ER

PT J
AU Robichaud, CD
   Rooney, RC
AF Robichaud, Courtney D.
   Rooney, Rebecca C.
TI Long-term effects of a Phragmites australis invasion on birds in a Lake
   Erie coastal marsh
SO JOURNAL OF GREAT LAKES RESEARCH
DT Article
DE Coastal marsh; Common reed; Invasive plant species; Lake Erie;
   Marsh-nesting birds; Waterbirds
ID COMMON REED; TIDAL MARSHES; WATER DEPTH; NEW-JERSEY; HABITAT; WETLANDS;
   ABUNDANCE; RICHNESS; PLANTS; MECHANISMS
AB On the North shore of Lake,Erie, Long Point provides habitat to many thousands of breeding and migrating birds, including marsh-nesting species that are in decline across the Great Lakes. Invasive Phragmites australis threatens the ecological integrity of these marshes. Early concerns prompted a study into the effects of invasion on bird use in 2001-2002 that concluded P. australis was not a major bird conservation issue. We evaluate breeding season bird occupancy in these wetlands after over a decade of P. australis expansion, comparing bird diversity and abundance in P. australis with diversity and abundance in the vegetation communities that P. australis is displacing: cattail, meadow, and open-water marsh. We also examine community composition and functional traits to better capture the effects of P. australis invasion. In 2015, total bird abundance was lower in P. australis than cattail marsh (ANOVA p < 0.001), with little difference in bird species richness among vegetation types (ANOVA p = 0.272). Bird community composition was distinct among the vegetation types (MRPP p < 0.001), such that P. australis supported a subset of bird species found within cattail and meadow marsh habitat, rather than novel species. Phragmites australis habitat excludes many marsh-nesting species and provides habitat for shrub-nesting, ground and foliage gleaners instead. Marsh-nesters of conservation concern are restricted to remaining cattail, meadow marsh, and open-water habitat. The full effects of P. australis invasion may exhibit a lag time, and community composition and functional traits should be considered when evaluating the effects of biological invasions. (C) 2017 International Association for Great Lakes Research. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 0380-1330
PD JUN
PY 2017
VL 43
IS 3
BP 141
EP 149
DI 10.1016/j.jglr.2017.03.018
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000402219200015
ER

PT J
AU Matich, P
   Kiszka, JJ
   Mourier, J
   Planes, S
   Heithaus, MR
AF Matich, Philip
   Kiszka, Jeremy J.
   Mourier, Johann
   Planes, Serge
   Heithaus, Michael R.
TI Species co-occurrence affects the trophic interactions of two juvenile
   reef shark species in tropical lagoon nurseries in Moorea (French
   Polynesia)
SO MARINE ENVIRONMENTAL RESEARCH
DT Article
DE Coastal waters; Marine ecology; Niche separation hypothesis; Pacific;
   Shark nursery; Stable isotopes; Trophic shift
ID STOMACH CONTENT-ANALYSIS; STABLE-ISOTOPE RATIOS; CARCHARHINUS
   MELANOPTERUS; CHARACTER DISPLACEMENT; COMMON ELASMOBRANCHS; FIELD
   EXPERIMENTS; DIETARY OVERLAP; FOOD-WEB; COMPETITION; ECOSYSTEM
AB Food web structure is shaped by interactions within and across trophic levels. As such, understanding how the presence and absence of predators, prey, and competitors affect species foraging patterns is important for predicting the consequences of changes in species abundances, distributions, and behaviors. Here, we used plasma delta C-13 and delta N-15 values from juvenile blacktip reef sharks (Carcharhinus melanopterus) and juvenile sicklefin lemon sharks (Negaprion acutidens) to investigate how species co-occurrence affects their trophic interactions in littoral waters of Moorea, French Polynesia. Co-occurrence led to isotopic niche partitioning among sharks within nurseries, with significant increases in delta N-15 values among sicklefin lemon sharks, and significant decreases in delta N-15 among blacktip reef sharks. Niche segregation likely promotes coexistence of these two predators during early years of growth and development, but data do not suggest coexistence affects life history traits, such as body size, body condition, and ontogenetic niche shifts. Plasticity in trophic niches among juvenile blacktip reef sharks and sicklefin lemon sharks also suggests these predators are able to account for changes in community structure, resource availability, and intra-guild competition, and may fill similar functional roles in the absence of the other species, which is important as environmental change and human impacts persist in coral reef ecosystems. (C) 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
OI Mourier, Johann/0000-0001-9019-1717; Kiszka, Jeremy/0000-0003-1095-8979
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 0141-1136
EI 1879-0291
PD JUN
PY 2017
VL 127
BP 84
EP 91
DI 10.1016/j.marenvres.2017.03.010
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology;
   Toxicology
UT WOS:000402212400009
PM 28400049
ER

PT J
AU Kopf, RK
   Shaw, C
   Humphries, P
AF Kopf, R. Keller
   Shaw, Casey
   Humphries, Paul
TI Trait-based prediction of extinction risk of small-bodied freshwater
   fishes
SO CONSERVATION BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE body size; conservation status; endangered species; fish; functional
   trait; IUCN Red List; life-history; rivers
ID LIFE-HISTORY TRAITS; MARINE FISHES; RIO-GRANDE; BODY-SIZE; BIODIVERSITY;
   CONSERVATION; BIRDS; BASIN; HYDROPOWER; SECURITY
AB Small body size is generally correlated with r-selected life-history traits, including early maturation, short-generation times, and rapid growth rates, that result in high population turnover and a reduced risk of extinction. Unlike other classes of vertebrates, however, small freshwater fishes appear to have an equal or greater risk of extinction than large fishes. We explored whether particular traits explain the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) Red List conservation status of small-bodied freshwater fishes from 4 temperate river basins: Murray-Darling, Australia; Danube, Europe; Mississippi-Missouri, North America; and the Rio Grande, North America. Twenty-three ecological and life-history traits were collated for all 171 freshwater fishes of 120 mm total length. We used generalized linear mixed-effects models to assess which combination of the 23 traits best explained whether a species was threatened or not threatened. We used the best models to predict the probability of 29 unclassified species being listed as threatened. With and without controlling for phylogeny at the family level, small body sizeamong small-bodied specieswas the most influential trait correlated with threatened species listings. The k-folds cross-validation demonstrated that body size and a random effect structure that included family predicted the threat status with an accuracy of 78% (SE 0.5). We identified 10 species likely to be threatened that are not listed as such on the IUCN Red List. Small body size is not a trait that provides universal resistance to extinction, particularly for vertebrates inhabiting environments affected by extreme habitat loss and fragmentation. We hypothesize that this is because small-bodied species have smaller home ranges, lower dispersal capabilities, and heightened ecological specialization relative to larger vertebrates. Trait data and further model development are needed to predict the IUCN conservation status of the over 11,000 unclassified freshwater fishes, especially those under threat from proposed dam construction in the world's most biodiverse river basins.
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 0888-8892
EI 1523-1739
PD JUN
PY 2017
VL 31
IS 3
BP 581
EP 591
DI 10.1111/cobi.12882
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000400962000010
PM 27976421
ER

PT J
AU Albouy, C
   Delattre, VL
   Merigot, B
   Meynard, CN
   Leprieur, F
AF Albouy, Camille
   Delattre, Valentine L.
   Merigot, Bastien
   Meynard, Christine N.
   Leprieur, Fabien
TI Multifaceted biodiversity hotspots of marine mammals for conservation
   priorities
SO DIVERSITY AND DISTRIBUTIONS
DT Article
DE conservation; functional diversity; marine mammals; phylogenetic
   diversity
ID FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; PHYLOGENETIC DIVERSITY; PROTECTED AREAS;
   EVOLUTIONARY HISTORY; ECOSYSTEM PROCESSES; EXTINCTION RISK;
   PRODUCTIVITY; POPULATION; REDUNDANCY; ECOLOGY
AB AimIdentifying the multifaceted biodiversity hotspots for marine mammals and their spatial overlap with human threats at the global scale.
   LocationWorld-wide.
   MethodsWe compiled a functional trait database for 121 species of marine mammals characterized by 14 functional traits grouped into five categories. We estimated marine mammal species richness (SR) as well as functional (FD) and phylogenetic diversity (PD) per grid cell (1 degrees x1 degrees) using the FRic index (a measure of trait diversity as the volume of functional space occupied by the species present in an assemblage) and the PD index (the amount of evolutionary history represented by a set of species), respectively. Finally, we assessed the spatial congruence of these three facets of biodiversity hotspots (defined as 2.5% and 5% of the highest values of SR, FD and PD) with human threats at the global scale.
   ResultsWe showed that the FRic index was weakly correlated with both SR and the PD index. Specifically, SR and FRic displayed a triangular relationship, that is, increasing variability in FRic along the species richness gradient. We also observed a striking lack of spatial congruence (<0.1%) between current human threats and the distribution of the multiple facets of biodiversity hotspots.
   Main ConclusionsWe highlighted that functional diversity calculated using the FRic index is weakly associated with the species richness of marine mammals world-wide. This is one of the most endangered vertebrate groups playing a key ecological role in marine ecosystems. This finding calls for caution when using only species richness as a benchmark for defining marine mammal biodiversity hotspots. The very low level of spatial congruence between hotspots of current threats and those of the multiple facets of marine mammal biodiversity suggests that current biodiversity patterns for this group have already been greatly affected by their history of exploitation.
RI Merigot, Bastien/H-7754-2018; Meynard, Christine/B-2082-2010; albouy,
   camille/H-9317-2012; Shen, ChengHan/D-1972-2018
OI Merigot, Bastien/0000-0001-5264-4324; Meynard,
   Christine/0000-0002-5983-6289; albouy, camille/0000-0003-1629-2389; 
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 1366-9516
EI 1472-4642
PD JUN
PY 2017
VL 23
IS 6
BP 615
EP 626
DI 10.1111/ddi.12556
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000401434600004
ER

PT J
AU Belley, R
   Snelgrove, PVR
AF Belley, Renald
   Snelgrove, Paul V. R.
TI The role of infaunal functional and species diversity in short-term
   response of contrasting benthic communities to an experimental food
   pulse
SO JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL MARINE BIOLOGY AND ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE Benthic fluxes; Infauna; Species diversity; Functional diversity; Food
   pulse; Organic matter remineralization
ID MARINE-SEDIMENTS; MULTIPLE TRAITS; RAPID RESPONSE; SEA-FLOOR;
   BIODIVERSITY; PHYTODETRITUS; MULTIVARIATE; IMPACT; BIOTURBATION; OXYGEN
AB Benthic communities play a major role in organic matter remineralization but the role played by macrofauna functional and taxonomic diversity remains elusive. To investigate this topic, we collected sediment cores from two different continental shelf locations near British Columbia, Canada, that differed in diversity to determine how the communities would respond to organic enrichment in the short term (similar to 24 h). We added phytodetritus to half of the cores, measured benthic oxygen and nutrient fluxes in natural and enriched incubations, identified macrofauna, and calculated a suite of functional and taxonomic diversity indices. We found that benthic communities in Saanich Inlet (SI) and the Strait of Georgia East (SoGE) differed significantly in composition and that this difference corresponded to significant differences in benthic flux rates between sites. Multivariate analyses showed that the higher taxonomic (Simpson's diversity) and functional richness (FRic) observed in SoGE explained generally higher benthic flux rates at SoGE compared to SI. In enriched incubations, the higher species richness observed at SoGE explained most of the enhanced benthic flux rates measured in SoGE compared to SI. Our study also identified mean densities of detritivores and omnivores as primary predictors of the higher benthic flux rates measured in enriched incubations in SoGE compared to SI. These results suggest that detritivores and omnivores are the first functional groups of macrofaunal organisms to ingest fresh phytodetritus on the sea floor, and point to their primary importance in short-term remineralization of organic matter following phytoplankton bloom deposition on the seafloor. Our results further indicate that sediments with higher functional diversity may process organic matter and regenerate nutrients more quickly than lower diversity sediments, and that diversity loss may have negative consequences for ecosystem functioning of continental shelf sediments. (C) 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 0022-0981
EI 1879-1697
PD JUN
PY 2017
VL 491
BP 38
EP 50
DI 10.1016/j.jembe.2017.03.005
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000401209000005
ER

PT J
AU Corrales, X
   Ofir, E
   Coll, M
   Goren, M
   Edelist, D
   Heymans, JJ
   Gal, G
AF Corrales, X.
   Ofir, E.
   Coll, M.
   Goren, M.
   Edelist, D.
   Heymans, J. J.
   Gal, G.
TI Modeling the role and impact of alien species and fisheries on the
   Israeli marine continental shelf ecosystem
SO JOURNAL OF MARINE SYSTEMS
DT Article
DE Eastern Mediterranean Sea; Food web; Ecopath model; Alien species;
   Fishing
ID EASTERN MEDITERRANEAN SEA; FOOD-WEB MODELS; FISHING IMPACTS;
   CONSERVATION; BIODIVERSITY; COMMUNITY; ECOPATH; ECOSIM; CONSEQUENCES;
   COMPLEXITY
AB The ecosystems of the Israeli Mediterranean coast have undergone significant changes in recent decades mainly due to species invasions and fishing. In order to characterize the structure and functioning of the marine continental shelf of the Israeli Mediterranean coast and assess temporal changes, we developed a food web model representing two time periods: 1990-1994 and 2008-2012.
   The 1990-1994 and 2008-2012 food web models were composed of 39 and 41 functional groups, respectively. Functional groups ranged from primary producers to top predators, and included six and eight alien functional groups, respectively, encompassing several crustacean and fish species. Input data included local surveys and fishery statistics, published data on stomach content analyses, and the application of empirical equations to estimate consumption and production rates.
   Results of the competitive interactions between alien and native species and changes in trophic flows between food web components highlight the increasing impact of alien species over time. Fishing had noticeable impacts in both time periods and played an important role in the ecosystem. Despite different productivity rates and other environmental differences, the Israeli marine ecosystem shared common structural and functional traits with other Mediterranean marine ecosystems. This is the first attempt to study the ecosystem of the Levant region using mass-balance models and to integrate such a large amount of alien species into food web analyses. (C) 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
TC 6
Z9 6
SN 0924-7963
EI 1879-1573
PD JUN
PY 2017
VL 170
BP 88
EP 102
DI 10.1016/j.jmarsys.2017.02.004
SC Geology; Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000401211400008
ER

PT J
AU Floury, M
   Usseglio-Polatera, P
   Delattre, C
   Souchon, Y
AF Floury, Mathieu
   Usseglio-Polatera, Philippe
   Delattre, Cecile
   Souchon, Yves
TI Assessing long-term effects of multiple, potentially confounded drivers
   in ecosystems from species traits
SO GLOBAL CHANGE BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE climate change; confounding effect; invertebrates; large rivers;
   long-term trends; multiple drivers; species traits; water quality
ID GLOBAL CLIMATE-CHANGE; LIFE-HISTORY; MACROINVERTEBRATE COMMUNITIES;
   BENTHIC-MACROINVERTEBRATES; INVERTEBRATE COMMUNITIES; AQUATIC
   ECOSYSTEMS; BIOLOGICAL TRAITS; ECOLOGICAL STATUS; HABITAT TEMPLET;
   EUROPEAN RIVERS
AB Although species traits have the potential to disentangle long-term effects of multiple, potentially confounded drivers in ecosystems, this issue has received very little attention in the literature. We aimed at filling this gap by assessing the relative effects of hydroclimatic and water quality factors on the trait composition of invertebrate assemblages over 30 years in the Middle Loire River (France). Using a priori predictions on the long-term variation of trait-based adaptations over the three decades, we evaluated the ability of invertebrate traits to indicate the effects of warming, discharge reduction and water quality improvement. Hydroclimatic and water quality factors contributed to up to 65% of the variation in trait composition. More than 70% of the initial trait response predictions made according to observed long-term hydroclimatic changes were confirmed. They supported a general climate-induced trend involving adapted resistance and resilience strategies. A partial confounding effect of water quality improvement acting on trophic processes was also highlighted, indicating that improved water quality management can significantly help to reduce some adverse effects of climate change. This trait-based approach can have wider implications for investigating long-term changes driven by multiple, potentially confounded factors, as frequently encountered in the context of global change.
TC 6
Z9 6
SN 1354-1013
EI 1365-2486
PD JUN
PY 2017
VL 23
IS 6
BP 2297
EP 2307
DI 10.1111/gcb.13575
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000400445900015
PM 27873443
ER

PT J
AU Saulino, HH
   Leite-Rossi, LA
   Trivinho-Strixino, S
AF Saulino, Hugo Henrique
   Leite-Rossi, Luciene Aparecida
   Trivinho-Strixino, Susana
TI The effect of small reservoirs on chironomid diversity and trait
   composition in Savanna streams: evidence for Serial Discontinuity
   Concept
SO HYDROBIOLOGIA
DT Article
DE Niche; Habitat specialization; Headwaters; Stream conservation;
   Macroinvertebrates
ID FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; HEADWATER STREAMS; MACROINVERTEBRATE DIVERSITY;
   AQUATIC INSECTS; RIVER-BASIN; SMALL DAMS; BIODIVERSITY; ASSEMBLAGES;
   ECOSYSTEMS; STRATEGIES
AB Habitat discontinuity is one of the main causes of diversity reduction in lotic ecosystems. We tested the predictions of the Serial Discontinuity Concept (SDC) caused by small reservoirs on the functional diversity (FD) of Chironomidae assemblages in Neotropical Savanna streams. We obtained taxonomic information from segments upstream and downstream of small reservoirs. In addition, abiotic variables, such as stream segment width, flow velocity, dissolved oxygen, pH, conductivity, water temperature, and organic matter were measured. We analyzed the Chironomidae assemblage FD using the functional richness (FRic), functional dispersion (FDis), trait relevance, as well as the species richness metrics. We used a non-parametric paired tests to compare differences in the FD indices, species richness, and the abiotic variables between the upstream and downstream segments. The results suggest that there were reductions in the FRic, FDis, species richness, and organic matter percentage below reservoirs. Moreover, depth, width, and dissolved oxygen increased in the downstream segments. The discontinuity length presented a negative influence in the FD indexes toward downstream segments as proposed by the SDC theory. We concluded that the discontinuity length affected the dispersal ability of some Chironomidae taxa, causing richness reduction and dissimilarity in the assemblages' functional traits toward downstream stretches.
RI Saulino, Hugo Henrique/C-2449-2014
OI Saulino, Hugo Henrique/0000-0002-4725-7239
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 0018-8158
EI 1573-5117
PD JUN
PY 2017
VL 793
IS 1
BP 109
EP 119
DI 10.1007/s10750-016-3013-2
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000399890800008
ER

PT J
AU Wohlgemuth, D
   Solan, M
   Godbold, JA
AF Wohlgemuth, Daniel
   Solan, Martin
   Godbold, Jasmin A.
TI Species contributions to ecosystem process and function can be
   population dependent and modified by biotic and abiotic setting
SO PROCEEDINGS OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY B-BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES
DT Article
DE bioirrigation; bioturbation; functional traits; functional diversity;
   population; trait variability
ID INTRASPECIFIC TRAIT VARIABILITY; CLIMATE-CHANGE; COMMUNITY ECOLOGY;
   SEDIMENT REWORKING; SPATIAL SCALES; MARINE BENTHOS; STABLE CARBON;
   BALTIC SEA; IN-SITU; DIVERSITY
AB There is unequivocal evidence that altered biodiversity, through changes in the expression and distribution of functional traits, can have large impacts on ecosystem properties. However, trait-based summaries of how organisms affect ecosystem properties often assume that traits show constancy within and between populations and that species contributions to ecosystem functioning are not overly affected by the presence of other species or variations in abiotic conditions. Here, we evaluate the validity of these assumptions using an experiment in which three geographically distinct populations of intertidal sediment-dwelling invertebrates are reciprocally substituted. We find that the mediation of macronutrient generation by these species can vary between different populations and show that changes in biotic and/or abiotic conditions can further modify functionally important aspects of the behaviour of individuals within a population. Our results demonstrate the importance of knowing how, when, and why traits are expressed and suggest that these dimensions of species functionality are not sufficiently well-constrained to facilitate the accurate projection of the functional consequences of change. Information regarding the ecological role of key species and assumptions about the form of species environment interactions needs urgent refinement.
OI Godbold, Jasmin/0000-0001-5558-8188; Solan, Martin/0000-0001-9924-5574
TC 4
Z9 5
SN 0962-8452
EI 1471-2954
PD MAY 31
PY 2017
VL 284
IS 1855
AR 20162805
DI 10.1098/rspb.2016.2805
SC Life Sciences & Biomedicine - Other Topics; Environmental Sciences &
   Ecology; Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000405148800010
PM 28566482
ER

PT J
AU Beltran-Heredia, E
   Aksnes, DL
   Cao, FJ
AF Beltran-Heredia, Elena
   Aksnes, Dag L.
   Cao, Francisco J.
TI Phytoplankton size scaling with nutrient concentration
SO MARINE ECOLOGY PROGRESS SERIES
DT Article
DE Half-saturation constant; Scaling; Handling time; Porter number;
   Phytoplankton; Nitrate uptake
ID NITRATE UPTAKE; CELL-SIZE; TRAITS; OCEAN; MODEL; PATTERNS; KINETICS;
   ACCLIMATION; DYNAMICS; GROWTH
AB Phytoplankton, the autotrophic component of the plankton community, is a key factor in oceanic ecosystems and in biogeochemical cycling. Over much of the ocean, phytoplankton growth is limited by nitrogen uptake (as nitrate), which is commonly described in ecosystem modelling by the Michaelis-Menten equation: V = V-max S/(K + S). Previous phytoplankton data compilations have shown that the maximum uptake rate, V-max, and the half-saturation constant, K, increase with organism size. Independent studies have also reported that K increases with nitrate concentration, S. Here, we assume that this K increase with S is due to an increase in the dominant organism size in the phytoplankton community with increasing nutrient concentration. Previous studies support this assumption, showing that nitrate abundance is the main factor determining dominant organism size. Based on this assumption and on previously published experimental observations for K, we show that phytoplankton dominant size, r, scales approximately with S-0.85. This increase in dominant size can also entail size-related changes in traits (such as the number of porters) that impact K and V-max. Furthermore, by combining a trait-based uptake model with the experimental results of K and V-max, we derive scaling relations for the number of porters and the handling time in terms of r. Our results indicate that handling time decreases approximately with r(-0.90) while porter number increases approximately with r(1.56). These results may be useful in characterizing size-dependent nutrient uptake in marine ecosystems and biogeochemical cycling models.
RI Cao, Francisco J./B-7794-2008
OI Cao, Francisco J./0000-0003-1611-913X
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0171-8630
EI 1616-1599
PD MAY 17
PY 2017
VL 571
BP 59
EP 64
DI 10.3354/meps12132
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology;
   Oceanography
UT WOS:000401800100005
ER

PT J
AU Moya, RS
   Meza, SE
   Diaz, CM
   Ariza, AC
   Calderon, SD
   Pena-Rojas, K
AF Santelices Moya, Romulo
   Espinoza Meza, Sergio
   Magni Diaz, Carlos
   Cabrera Ariza, Antonio
   Donoso Calderon, Sergio
   Pena-Rojas, Karen
TI Variability in seed germination and seedling growth at the intra- and
   inter-provenance levels of Nothofagus glauca (Lophozonia glauca), an
   endemic species of Central Chile
SO NEW ZEALAND JOURNAL OF FORESTRY SCIENCE
DT Article
DE Germination capacity; Hualo; Provenance; Seed size; Seedling growth
ID MT FUJI; POPULATIONS; DIFFERENTIATION; CONSEQUENCES; ENVIRONMENT;
   PATTERNS; DORMANCY; FOREST; TREES
AB Background: Patterns of seed germination and subsequent seedling growth of the endemic species Nothofagus glauca (Phil.) Krasser (Lophozonia glauca) (Hualo) were studied in two provenances from Mediterranean Central Chile (pre-Andean mountain range provenance and coastal range provenance). The main aim of the study was to determine differences in seed germination and seedling growth at the intra- and inter-provenance levels.
   Methods: The experiment was carried out with seeds from two provenances and four to five different sites from each provenance. Seed germination tests were conducted in 10 x 1 m beds in a greenhouse. Germinated seeds were sown in 140-mL containers and cultivated under nursery conditions for 8 months. After that period, growth and survival were measured.
   Results: Germination, growth and survival were highly variable at the intra- provenance level. Sites from the pre-Andean mountain range provenance exhibited lower germination capacity (33.1%) and seedling survival (76.3%) than sites from the Coastal range provenance (40.2 and 91.3%, respectively).
   Conclusions: Provenance variability was important for seed mass and germination, and seedling survival, while intra- provenance variability was systematically higher, whatever the functional trait considered, indicating a high potential capacity of the species to adapt to climate change. This intra-provenance variability must be conserved with the use of local seed. In our case, pre-Andean sites must be established in high-elevation environments, while coastal provenances must be restricted to more lowland and coastal environments.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0048-0134
EI 1179-5395
PD MAY 9
PY 2017
VL 47
AR 10
DI 10.1186/s40490-017-0091-5
SC Forestry
UT WOS:000402105600001
ER

PT J
AU Esposti, MD
   Romero, EM
AF Degli Esposti, Mauro
   Martinez Romero, Esperanza
TI The functional microbiome of arthropods
SO PLOS ONE
DT Article
ID GUT MICROBIOTA; BACTERIAL COMMUNITY; ESCHERICHIA-COLI; GENE-SEQUENCES;
   DIVERSITY; EVOLUTION; LIFE; TREE; ALPHAPROTEOBACTERIA; IDENTIFICATION
AB Many studies on the microbiome of animals have been reported but a comprehensive analysis is lacking. Here we present a meta-analysis on the microbiomes of arthropods and their terrestrial habitat, focusing on the functional profile of bacterial communities derived from metabolic traits that are essential for microbial life. We report a detailed analysis of probably the largest set of biochemically defined functional traits ever examined in microbiome studies. This work deals with the phylum proteobacteria, which is usually dominant in marine and terrestrial environments and covers all functions associated with microbiomes. The considerable variation in the distribution and abundance of proteobacteria in microbiomes has remained fundamentally unexplained. This analysis reveals discrete functional groups characteristic for adaptation to anaerobic conditions, which appear to be defined by environmental filtering of taxonomically related taxa. The biochemical diversification of the functional groups suggests an evolutionary trajectory in the structure of arthropods' microbiome, from metabolically versatile to specialized proteobacterial organisms that are adapted to complex environments such as the gut of social insects. Bacterial distribution in arthropods' microbiomes also shows taxonomic clusters that do not correspond to functional groups and may derive from other factors, including common contaminants of soil and reagents.
OI Degli Esposti, Mauro/0000-0002-0977-119X
TC 9
Z9 10
SN 1932-6203
PD MAY 5
PY 2017
VL 12
IS 5
AR e0176573
DI 10.1371/journal.pone.0176573
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000400649500010
ER

PT J
AU Kumar, R
   Verma, H
   Haider, S
   Bajaj, A
   Sood, U
   Ponnusamy, K
   Nagar, S
   Shakarad, MN
   Negi, RK
   Singh, Y
   Khurana, JP
   Gilbert, JA
   Lal, R
AF Kumar, Roshan
   Verma, Helianthous
   Haider, Shazia
   Bajaj, Abhay
   Sood, Utkarsh
   Ponnusamy, Kalaiarasan
   Nagar, Shekhar
   Shakarad, Mallikarjun N.
   Negi, Ram Krishan
   Singh, Yogendra
   Khurana, J. P.
   Gilbert, Jack A.
   Lal, Rup
TI Comparative Genomic Analysis Reveals Habitat-Specific Genes and
   Regulatory Hubs within the Genus Novosphingobium
SO MSYSTEMS
DT Article
DE Novosphingobium; core genome; habitat-specific genes; pangenome;
   regulatory hubs
ID INTERACTION NETWORKS; MARINE-ENVIRONMENT; MEMBRANE-PROTEINS; SEARCH
   TOOL; SP NOV.; BACTERIUM; BIOSYNTHESIS; DEGRADATION; SPHINGOBIUM;
   SEQUENCE
AB Species belonging to the genus Novosphingobium are found in many different habitats and have been identified as metabolically versatile. Through comparative genomic analysis, we identified habitat-specific genes and regulatory hubs that could determine habitat selection for Novosphingobium spp. Genomes from 27 Novosphingobium strains isolated from diverse habitats such as rhizosphere soil, plant surfaces, heavily contaminated soils, and marine and freshwater environments were analyzed. Genome size and coding potential were widely variable, differing significantly between habitats. Phylogenetic relationships between strains were less likely to describe functional genotype similarity than the habitat from which they were isolated. In this study, strains (19 out of 27) with a recorded habitat of isolation, and at least 3 representative strains per habitat, comprised four ecological groups-rhizosphere, contaminated soil, marine, and freshwater. Sulfur acquisition and metabolism were the only core genomic traits to differ significantly in proportion between these ecological groups; for example, alkane sulfonate (ssuABCD) assimilation was found exclusively in all of the rhizospheric isolates. When we examined osmolytic regulation in Novosphingobium spp. through ectoine biosynthesis, which was assumed to be marine habitat specific, we found that it was also present in isolates from contaminated soil, suggesting its relevance beyond the marine system. Novosphingobium strains were also found to harbor a wide variety of mono- and dioxygenases, responsible for the metabolism of several aromatic compounds, suggesting their potential to act as degraders of a variety of xenobiotic compounds. Protein-protein interaction analysis revealed beta-barrel outer membrane proteins as habitat-specific hubs in each of the four habitats-freshwater (Saro_1868), marine water (PP1Y_AT17644), rhizosphere (PMI02_00367), and soil (V474_17210). These outer membrane proteins could play a key role in habitat demarcation and extend our understanding of the metabolic versatility of the Novosphingobium species. IMPORTANCE This study highlights the significant role of a microorganism's genetic repertoire in structuring the similarity between Novosphingobium strains. The results suggest that the phylogenetic relationships were mostly influenced by metabolic trait enrichment, which is possibly governed by the microenvironment of each microbe's respective niche. Using core genome analysis, the enrichment of a certain set of genes specific to a particular habitat was determined, which provided insights on the influence of habitat on the distribution of metabolic traits in Novosphingobium strains. We also identified habitat-specific protein hubs, which suggested delineation of Novosphingobium strains based on their habitat. Examining the available genomes of ecologically diverse bacterial species and analyzing the habitat-specific genes are useful for understanding the distribution and evolution of functional and phylogenetic diversity in the genus Novosphingobium.
TC 6
Z9 6
SN 2379-5077
PD MAY-JUN
PY 2017
VL 2
IS 3
AR UNSP e00020-17
DI 10.1128/mSystems.00020-17
SC Microbiology
UT WOS:000408196500007
PM 28567447
ER

PT J
AU Kenitz, KM
   Visser, AW
   Mariani, P
   Andersen, KH
AF Kenitz, Kasia M.
   Visser, Andre W.
   Mariani, Patrizio
   Andersen, Ken H.
TI Seasonal succession in zooplankton feeding traits reveals trophic trait
   coupling
SO LIMNOLOGY AND OCEANOGRAPHY
DT Article
ID WESTERN ENGLISH-CHANNEL; COPEPOD ACARTIA-TONSA; PHYTOPLANKTON COMMUNITY
   STRUCTURE; FUNCTIONAL TRAITS; OITHONA-SIMILIS; CHROMATIC ADAPTATION;
   MARINE-PHYTOPLANKTON; PLANKTONIC COPEPOD; NORTH-ATLANTIC; TRADE-OFFS
AB The seasonal forcing of pelagic communities invokes a succession of the dominant phytoplankton and zooplankton species. Here, we characterize the seasonal succession of the plankton traits and their interactions using observations and model simulations of the plankton community in the western English Channel. We focus on activity traits that characterize the defensive and feeding abilities of zooplankton and distinguish between low risk, low return ambush feeders and high risk, high return feeding-current feeders. While the phytoplankton succession depends on traits related to nutrient acquisition and photosynthesis, it also depends on grazing which couples feeding and motility traits across trophic guilds. Despite interannual variations in the species dominating the protist plankton community, the seasonal trait distribution reveals robust and repeatable seasonal patterns, changing between non-motile cells flourishing in spring and motile community dominating during summer. The zooplankton community is dominated by active feeding-current feeders with peak biomass in the late spring declining during summer. The model reveals how zooplankton grazing reinforces protist plankton seasonal succession and shows how the physical environment controls the vertical structure of plankton communities, where ambush feeders exhibit a preference for greater depths during summer. We characterize the seasonal succession as trophic trait coupling and conjecture that this coupling leads to a trophic trait cascade where successive trophic levels alternate in their expression of activity traits further up in the food chain.
OI Visser, Andre/0000-0002-1604-7263; Andersen, Ken
   Haste/0000-0002-8478-3430
TC 10
Z9 10
SN 0024-3590
EI 1939-5590
PD MAY
PY 2017
VL 62
IS 3
BP 1184
EP 1197
DI 10.1002/lno.10494
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000402907100021
ER

PT J
AU Roselli, L
   Litchman, E
   Stanca, E
   Cozzoli, F
   Basset, A
AF Roselli, Leonilde
   Litchman, Elena
   Stanca, Elena
   Cozzoli, Francesco
   Basset, Alberto
TI Individual trait variation in phytoplankton communities across multiple
   spatial scales
SO JOURNAL OF PLANKTON RESEARCH
DT Article
DE phytoplankton; biodiversity; morpho-functional traits; transitional
   waters
ID FRESH-WATER PHYTOPLANKTON; FUNCTIONAL TRAITS; RESOURCE COMPETITION;
   MARINE-PHYTOPLANKTON; THEORETICAL APPROACH; FLUCTUATING LIGHT; SPECIES
   RICHNESS; TRADE-OFFS; BIODIVERSITY; SIZE
AB In the context of maintenance of biodiversity and ecological functions, microbial ecologists face the challenge of linking individual level variability in functional traits to larger scale ecosystem processes. Phytoplankton cell size and shape are key traits under selection by environmental filters and species interactions. Spatial differences in resource availability shape species diversity according to their use efficiency. Niche partitioning promotes plankton diversity. Here, we explore how size and shape enter the diversity game. How does taxonomic and morpho-functional community structure vary at different spatial scales? What are the potential drivers shaping the structure of phytoplankton communities? We explore these questions by looking at the individual level variability in taxonomic and morphological traits in a biogeographical snapshot of natural phytoplankton communities in coastal ecosystems around the globe. We found that taxonomic variability is mainly concentrated at local and regional levels, whereas shape and size variability are mainly concentrated at a local level, despite the environmental heterogeneity of ecosystems. Species diversity was more variable than trait diversity from local to global spatial scales. We suggest that structural organization of phytoplankton communities in coastal ecosystems may follow a hierarchical pattern of trait organization, where a different combination of multiple functional traits may represent effective strategies and promote success under given environmental conditions as a resolution of Hutchinson's paradox.
OI Cozzoli, Francesco/0000-0002-6413-0977
TC 2
Z9 3
SN 0142-7873
EI 1464-3774
PD MAY-JUN
PY 2017
VL 39
IS 3
BP 577
EP 588
DI 10.1093/plankt/fbx001
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000402613800017
ER

PT J
AU Bertocci, I
   Godino, JAD
   Freitas, C
   Incera, M
   Bio, A
   Dominguez, R
AF Bertocci, Iacopo
   Dominguez Godino, Jorge A.
   Freitas, Cristiano
   Incera, Monica
   Bio, Ana
   Dominguez, Rula
TI Compounded perturbations in coastal areas: contrasting responses to
   nutrient enrichment and the regime of storm-related disturbance depend
   on life-history traits
SO FUNCTIONAL ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE climate change; eutrophication; mean intensity; rocky intertidal;
   storminess; temporal variance
ID GREAT-BARRIER-REEF; ROCKY INTERTIDAL COMMUNITY; CLIMATE-CHANGE;
   CORAL-REEFS; SPECIES-DIVERSITY; TEMPORAL VARIABILITY; MACROALGAL BLOOMS;
   MARINE ECOSYSTEMS; EXTINCTION RISK; BIOGENIC REEFS
AB 1. Natural systems are exposed to compounded perturbations, whose changes in temporal variance can be as important as those in mean intensity for shaping the structure of assemblages. Specifically, climate-related physical disturbances and nutrient inputs due to natural and/or anthropogenic activities occur concomitantly, but experimental tests of the simultaneous effects of changes in the regime of more than one perturbation are generally lacking. Filling this gap is the key to understand ecological responses of natural assemblages to climate-related change in the intensity and temporal patterning of physical disturbance combined with other global stressors.
   2. Responses to factorial manipulations of nutrient enrichment, mean intensity and temporal variability in storm-like mechanical disturbance were examined, using benthic assemblages of tide-pools as model system.
   3. Response variables were mean abundance values and temporal variances of taxa with different life-traits. Consistent negative effects of disturbance intensity were observed for the mean cover of long-living taxa (algal canopies and the polychaete Sabellaria alveolata), whose temporal fluctuations were also reduced by more severe mechanical stress. More resilient taxa (ephemeral algae, mostly green of the genus Ulva) increased under enriched conditions, particularly when low-intensity events were irregularly applied over time. Opposite effects of disturbance intensity depending on nutrient availability occurred on filamentous algae (e.g. red of the genus Ceramium). This was probably due to the fact that, although nutrient enrichment stimulated the abundance of both algal groups, when this condition was combined with relatively mild physical disturbance the competitively superior ephemeral green algae tended to become dominant over filamentous red algae. The same did not occur under high intensity of disturbance since it likely damaged large, foliose fronds of Ulva-like forms more than small, filamentous fronds of Ceramium-like forms. Grazers were positively affected by nutrients, likely responding indirectly to more food available.
   4. A direct relationship between the mean abundance of most organisms and their temporal fluctuations was documented. However, all organisms persisted throughout the study, even under experimental conditions associated to the largest temporal variation in their abundance, likely due to their ability to resist to/quickly recover from, the applied perturbations. Therefore, in systems with great recovery abilities of dominant organisms (e.g. rocky intertidal, grasslands), effects of traits of the regime of disturbance and nutrient enrichment may modulate the fluctuations of populations not through the elimination and substitution of species, but through changes in relative abundances of the same species. This contrasts with the theory that temporal variation in abundance would be directly related to the risk of local extinction. Present findings enable more accurate predictions of the consequences of climatic and non-climatic scenarios on the biodiversity of marine and terrestrial systems sharing analogous functional traits of organisms. Future more intense physical disturbances are expected to exert negative effects on slow-growing/recovering species (e.g. habitat-formers) irrespectively of the temporal patterning of the same disturbances and nutrient inputs. On the contrary, more resistant species (e.g. encrusting algae on rocky shores or below-ground vegetation in grasslands) are expected to benefit from intense physical disturbance. Species whose abundance is more directly related to the availability of nutrients (e.g. filamentous and ephemeral algae or herbs) are expected to generally increase under enriched conditions, but their ability to eventually become dominant would depend on their ability to grow fast and attain cover large enough to overwhelm any possible control of concomitant disturbance intensity on their abundance. If, such as in the present examined system, virtually all organisms can persist, over the temporal scale of the experiment, under any combination of physical disturbance and nutrient availability, the resulting overall diversity is not predicted to change drastically. Nevertheless, low-intensity events evenly distributed and high-intensity events irregularly distributed appear as the conditions supporting the highest richness of taxa, independently of the availability of nutrients.
RI Scientific Productivity, CIIMAR/N-6498-2017; Scientific output,
   CIIMAR/E-5122-2012
OI Scientific Productivity, CIIMAR/0000-0002-3703-4402; Scientific output,
   CIIMAR/0000-0001-6270-2153; DOMINGUEZ GODINO, JORGE
   ANTONIO/0000-0001-6413-7629; Bertocci, Iacopo/0000-0002-1519-1677; Bio,
   Ana/0000-0003-4501-9410
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 0269-8463
EI 1365-2435
PD MAY
PY 2017
VL 31
IS 5
BP 1122
EP 1134
DI 10.1111/1365-2435.12815
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000400855300016
ER

PT J
AU Favre-Bac, L
   Lamberti-Raverot, B
   Puijalon, S
   Ernoult, A
   Burel, F
   Guillard, L
   Mony, C
AF Favre-Bac, Lisa
   Lamberti-Raverot, Barbara
   Puijalon, Sara
   Ernoult, Aude
   Burel, Francoise
   Guillard, Ludovic
   Mony, Cendrine
TI Plant dispersal traits determine hydrochorous species tolerance to
   connectivity loss at the landscape scale
SO JOURNAL OF VEGETATION SCIENCE
DT Article
DE Aquatic systems; Hydrochory; Landscape fragmentation; Plant strategies;
   Plant traits; Seed dispersal
ID LIFE-HISTORY TRAITS; DISTANCE SEED DISPERSAL; HABITAT FRAGMENTATION;
   INTRASPECIFIC VARIABILITY; GENE FLOW; METAPOPULATION; REPRODUCTION;
   DYNAMICS; POPULATIONS; RESPONSES
AB Aims Landscape fragmentation has strong negative consequences on biodiversity. In networks of linear elements, connectivity loss results in a decreased length of connected elements and increased potential barriers, directly impacting the ability of plants to disperse. However, species vary in their tolerance to connectivity loss, likely due to differences in dispersal strategies. We investigated whether species tolerance to decreased ditch network connectivity is determined by seed traits. We selected, as a case study, water-dispersed plant species in a ditch network.
   Location Ditch network in an intensive agricultural area in northern France.
   Methods We selected 27 sites of 500mx500m, where we calculated connectivity indices based on the length of connected ditches, intersections and culvert number. For each parameter, we calculated plant tolerance levels by analysing species changes in occurrence in response to change in connectivity values. Concurrently, we measured in laboratory conditions five seed traits involved in plant movement and establishment in standing aquatic systems and analysed their explanatory power in plant tolerance to fragmentation.
   Results All traits were significantly related to at least one component of ditch network connectivity. We interpreted the following two strategies in plant tolerance to connectivity loss from the results: (1) in networks where the connected network length was short, plants displayed short-distance dispersal with less efficient sexual reproduction, probably in favour of local vegetative multiplication; and (2) in networks with a high density of culverts or intersections, plants displayed seeds with reduced local retention, where seeds had the capacity to overcome long and frequent trapping events. In highly branched networks, plants also exhibited higher germination rates, promoting seed establishment when trapped along the banks. Seed capacity to be dispersed by wind at the water surface was only a marginal factor in plant tolerance to fragmentation.
   Conclusions Connectivity loss acted as a filter on species seed traits. The results of our study offer an enhanced understanding of plant dispersal in fragmented standing aquatic networks and emphasize the importance of developing functional approaches in landscape studies.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1100-9233
EI 1654-1103
PD MAY
PY 2017
VL 28
IS 3
BP 605
EP 615
DI 10.1111/jvs.12518
SC Plant Sciences; Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Forestry
UT WOS:000400937500016
ER

PT J
AU Pallottini, M
   Cappelletti, D
   Fabrizi, A
   Gaino, E
   Goretti, E
   Selvaggi, R
   Cereghino, R
AF Pallottini, M.
   Cappelletti, D.
   Fabrizi, A.
   Gaino, E.
   Goretti, E.
   Selvaggi, R.
   Cereghino, R.
TI Macroinvertebrate Functional Trait Responses to Chemical Pollution in
   Agricultural-Industrial Landscapes
SO RIVER RESEARCH AND APPLICATIONS
DT Article
DE macroinvertebrates; stream pollution; biological; ecological traits;
   bioassessment
ID FRESH-WATER MACROINVERTEBRATES; CO-INERTIA ANALYSIS; BIOLOGICAL TRAITS;
   MULTIMETRIC INDEX; CHIRONOMID LARVAE; AQUATIC INSECTS;
   BENTHIC-MACROINVERTEBRATES; ENVIRONMENTAL VARIABLES; INVERTEBRATE
   TRAITS; ECOLOGICAL TRAITS
AB Both physical-chemical and biological indicators are used to assess the ecological health of ecosystems. The functional trait composition of communities has the potential to predict the impact of environmental change on ecosystems, yet, we miss evidence that information on pollution can be used to forecast the functional responses of freshwater communities. We used chemical and ecological data collected in the Nestore river basin (Central Italy) to test whether (i) there are generalities in the response of macroinvertebrate functional diversity to river pollution; (ii) water pollution filters certain functional traits and (iii) traits do better than chemical analyses at revealing ecological stress in rivers. Due to interactions with hydrology, chemical variables showed higher seasonal variation at impacted sites, so occasional water samples represented snapshots. Functional traits did well at detecting water pollution by various chemicals, and there was a clear shift of trait combinations from unimpacted to impacted sites. Anthropogenic disturbances homogenized benthic communities in terms of taxonomic and functional composition, both in space (impacted sites) and time (seasons). Traits related to feeding habits (mainly reliance on fine particulate organic matter) and tolerance to organic pollution were prevalent at impacted reaches, and functional trait compositions were more stable than water chemistry over seasons because they integrate environmental conditions over longer time periods. Functional traits can play a relevant role in the bioassessment of polluted river ecosystems, even under low to moderate disturbance. Trait-based assessment can be complemented by chemical analyses, notably at highly polluted sites where biological diversity drops to its lowest levels. Copyright (c) 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
RI Cappelletti, David/C-5782-2009; Selvaggi, Roberta/U-5010-2017
OI Cappelletti, David/0000-0002-9652-2457; Selvaggi,
   Roberta/0000-0002-4133-5259; Pallottini, Matteo/0000-0002-0371-3239;
   Cereghino, Regis/0000-0003-3981-3159
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 1535-1459
EI 1535-1467
PD MAY
PY 2017
VL 33
IS 4
BP 505
EP 513
DI 10.1002/rra.3101
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Water Resources
UT WOS:000400594100004
ER

PT J
AU Borza, P
   Huber, T
   Leitner, P
   Remund, N
   Graf, W
AF Borza, Peter
   Huber, Thomas
   Leitner, Patrick
   Remund, Nadine
   Graf, Wolfram
TI Success factors and future prospects of Ponto-Caspian peracarid
   (Crustacea: Malacostraca) invasions: Is 'the worst over'?
SO BIOLOGICAL INVASIONS
DT Article
DE Amphipoda; Colonization rate; Cumacea; Isopoda; Mysida; Substrate
   preference
ID HEMIMYSIS-ANOMALA; DISTRIBUTIONAL PATTERNS; VARIABLE IMPORTANCE; RANGE
   EXTENSION; NORTH-AMERICA; LIFE-HISTORY; INVADER; RIVER; AMPHIPODA;
   IMPACT
AB Ponto-Caspian peracarids (amphipods, isopods, mysids and cumaceans) represent one of the most successful groups of aquatic invaders comprising several high-impact species, such as Chelicorophium curvispinum, Dikerogammarus villosus, or Hemimysis anomala. In the present study we made the first attempt to compare biological traits and the environmental preferences of invasive and non-invasive members of the group based on both literature and field data (Joint Danube Survey 3, 2013) with the goal of identifying factors linked to invasion success and drawing conclusions on future invasion risks. Both datasets indicated substrate preference as an important factor in spontaneous range expansion; all invasive species are lithophilous, whereas the majority of non-invasives are psammo-pelophilous. The remaining seven presently non-invasive lithophilous species deserve special attention when considering potential future invaders; however, due to their rarity and possible negative interactions with earlier colonists we consider the probability of their expansion in the foreseeable future as low. Their potential expansion could most likely be of minor consequence anyway, since no considerable functional novelty can be attributed to them in addition to species already present. In this limited context (regarding habitats dominated by hard substrates and not considering the potential further spread of already invasive species) it might be justified to conclude that 'the worst is over'. Nevertheless, impending navigation development projects both in the Danube-Main-Rhine and Dnieper-Pripyat-Bug-Vistula systems might favour the future spread of non-lithophilous species, which might imply a new invasion wave of Ponto-Caspian peracarids.
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 1387-3547
EI 1573-1464
PD MAY
PY 2017
VL 19
IS 5
BP 1517
EP 1532
DI 10.1007/s10530-017-1375-7
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000399808800013
ER

PT J
AU Bezerra, LAV
   Padial, AA
   Mariano, FB
   Garcez, DS
   Sanchez-Botero, JI
AF Valoes Bezerra, Luis Artur
   Padial, Andre Andrian
   Mariano, Filipe Brasil
   Garcez, Danielle Sequeira
   Sanchez-Botero, Jorge Ivan
TI Fish diversity in tidepools: assembling effects of environmental
   heterogeneity
SO ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY OF FISHES
DT Article
DE Coral reef fish; Functional traits; Beta diversity; Community
   organization; Gracilaria spp.; Brazilian western Atlantic
ID FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; BETA-DIVERSITY; COMMUNITY STRUCTURE; SPECIES
   COMPOSITION; INTERTIDAL FISHES; MULTIPLE TRAITS; POOL FISHES; ROCKY
   REEFS; ET-AL; PATTERNS
AB Tidepools are considered ecosystems of high interchangeable fish biota. However, natural and anthropogenic actions that alter negatively marine ecosystems functioning (e.g., algal exploitation) are causing homogenization of fish biodiversity. Here, we describe the functional and taxonomic assembling of fishes in beach rocks of northeastern Brazil. Traits of fish species were retrieved from Fishbase and beta diversity was assessed by the dispersion of abundance, presence-absence and functional diversity in the multivariate space. We explained spatial-temporal variation in: alpha diversity, taxonomic and functional community composition; as well as temporal variation in functional, beta and gamma diversities. We found an annual stability in fish diversity and composition, and that fish biota was assembled mainly per tidepools' depths. Substrate heterogeneity was correlated to depth, highlighting the role of local features as filters to organize the fish fauna vertically in tidepools, especially a cultivation of algae that influences the local assembling. We also highlight the uniqueness status of beach rocks in the Brazilian tropical region.
RI Bezerra, Luis Artur/J-3969-2015; Garcez, Danielle/M-1626-2017; Padial,
   Andre/H-8977-2012; Sanchez-Botero, Jorge/M-1627-2017; Bezerra, Luis
   Artur/S-1236-2018
OI Bezerra, Luis Artur/0000-0003-1954-5556; Garcez,
   Danielle/0000-0003-2595-8509; Padial, Andre/0000-0002-8766-5974;
   Sanchez-Botero, Jorge/0000-0001-6135-7917; Bezerra, Luis
   Artur/0000-0003-1954-5556
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0378-1909
EI 1573-5133
PD MAY
PY 2017
VL 100
IS 5
BP 551
EP 563
DI 10.1007/s10641-017-0584-3
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000400073300007
ER

PT J
AU Tamberg, Y
   Shunatova, N
AF Tamberg, Yuta
   Shunatova, Natalia
TI Tentacle structure in freshwater bryozoans
SO JOURNAL OF MORPHOLOGY
DT Article
DE feeding behavior; functional morphology; lophophore; phylactolaemata;
   putative sensory cells
ID MARINE BRYOZOANS; PARTICLE CAPTURE; NERVOUS-SYSTEM; PHYLACTOLAEMATE
   BRYOZOANS; FEEDING STRUCTURES; LOPHOPHORE; LOPHOTROCHOZOA; GYMNOLAEMATE;
   ECTOPROCTS; MORPHOLOGY
AB Tentacles are the main food-gathering organs of bryozoans. The most common design is a hollow tube of extracellular matrix (ECM), covered with ten columns of epithelial cells on the outside, and a coelothelium on the inside. Nerves follow the ECM, going between the bases of some epidermal cells. The tentacle musculature includes two bundles formed by myoepithelial cells of the coelothelium. The tentacles of freshwater (phylactolaemate) bryozoans, however, differ somewhat in structure from those of marine bryozoans. Here, we describe the tentacles of three species of phylactolaemates, comparing them to gymnolaemates and stenolaemates. Phylactolaemate tentacles tend to be longer, and with more voluminous coeloms. The composition of the frontal cell row and the number of frontal nerves is variable in freshwater bryozoans, but constant in marine groups. Abfrontal cells form a continuous row in Phylactolaemata, but occur intermittently in other two classes. Phylactolaemata lack the microvillar cuticle reported in Gymnolaemata. Abfrontal sensory tufts are always composed of pairs of mono- and/or biciliated cells. This arrangement differs from individual abfrontal ciliary cells of other bryozoans: monociliated in Stenolaemata and monociliated and multiciliated ones in Gymnolaemata. In all three groups, however, ciliated abfrontal cells probably serve as mechanoreceptors. We confirm previously described phylactolemate traits: an unusual arrangement of two-layered coelothelium lining the lateral sides of the tentacle and oral slits in the intertentacular membrane. As previously reported, tentacle movements involved in feeding differ between bryozoan groups, with phylactolaemates tending to have slower movements than both gymnolaemates and stenolaemates, and a narrower behavioral repertoire than gymnolaemates. The morphological and ultrastructural differences between the freshwater species we studied and marine bryozoans may be related to these functional differences. Muscle organization, tentacle and coelom size, and degree of confluence between tentacle and lophophore coeloms probably account for much of the observed behavioral variability.
OI Tamberg, Yuta/0000-0002-3460-3323; Shunatova,
   Natalia/0000-0003-1593-7552
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0362-2525
EI 1097-4687
PD MAY
PY 2017
VL 278
IS 5
BP 718
EP 733
DI 10.1002/jmor.20666
SC Anatomy & Morphology
UT WOS:000399744100009
PM 28182299
ER

PT J
AU Josserand, R
   Dupoue, A
   Agostini, S
   Haussy, C
   Le Galliard, JF
   Meylan, S
AF Josserand, Remy
   Dupoue, Andreaz
   Agostini, Simon
   Haussy, Claudy
   Le Galliard, Jean-Francois
   Meylan, Sandrine
TI Habitat degradation increases stress-hormone levels during the breeding
   season, and decreases survival and reproduction in adult common lizards
SO OECOLOGIA
DT Article
DE Allostasis; Corticosterone; Fitness; Immunocompetence; Triglycerides
ID SHORT-LIVED LIZARD; LACERTA-VIVIPARA; PHENOTYPIC PLASTICITY; COHORT
   VARIATION; MARINE IGUANAS; GLUCOCORTICOIDS; POPULATIONS; DISPERSAL;
   DENSITY; GROWTH
AB The allostatic load model describes how individuals maintain homeostasis in challenging environment and posits that costs induced by a chronic perturbation (i.e., allostatic load) are correlated to the secretion of glucocorticoids, such as corticosterone. Habitat perturbations from anthropogenic activities are multiple and functional responses to those are still unclear. Here, we manipulated the habitat quality in 24 semi-natural populations of the common lizard during 1 year. We tested the predictions of the allostatic load model that habitat degradation should increase baseline corticosterone levels, and should induce concomitant physiological changes, such as lipid mobilization and lower immunocompetence, and demographic changes, such as lower body growth, survival and/or reproductive performances. Our results highlight stage-dependent effects of habitat degradation on physiological traits during the breeding season: adult lizards had higher baseline corticosterone levels and yearling lizards had a lower inflammatory response than adults, whereas juveniles had higher circulating lipid levels than yearlings and adults without concomitant change in corticosterone levels. In addition, habitat degradation reduced the performances of adults but not of juveniles: in low habitat quality populations, adult males had a lower survival and females had a smaller fecundity. These results are in accordance with the allostatic load model given that allostatic load was detected only during the season and in life stages of maximal energy expenditure. This underlines the importance to account for individual energy requirements to better understand demographic responses to habitat perturbation.
RI Le Galliard, Jean-Francois/E-8702-2011
OI Le Galliard, Jean-Francois/0000-0002-5965-9868
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0029-8549
EI 1432-1939
PD MAY
PY 2017
VL 184
IS 1
BP 75
EP 86
DI 10.1007/s00442-017-3841-4
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000400369200006
PM 28364226
ER

PT J
AU Dauvin, JC
   Bakalem, A
   Baffreau, A
   Delecrin, C
   Bellan, G
   Lardicci, C
   Balestri, E
   Sarda, R
   Grimes, S
AF Dauvin, Jean-Claude
   Bakalem, Ali
   Baffreau, Alexandrine
   Delecrin, Claire
   Bellan, Gerard
   Lardicci, Claudio
   Balestri, Elena
   Sarda, Rafael
   Grimes, Samir
TI The well sorted fine sand community from the western Mediterranean Sea:
   A resistant and resilient marine habitat under diverse human pressures
SO ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION
DT Article
DE Mediterranean Sea; Diversity; Benthic structure; Benthic indices;
   Biological Traits Analysis; Human pressures
ID BOTTOM POLYCHAETE ASSEMBLAGES; ECOLOGICAL QUALITY STATUS; TRAITS
   ANALYSIS BTA; LONG-TERM CHANGES; BENTHIC MACROFAUNA; CONTINENTAL-SHELF;
   FUNCTIONAL STRUCTURE; ADRIATIC SEA; SOFT-BOTTOMS; BIOTIC INDEX
AB The Biocoenosis of Well Sorted Fine Sands (WSFS) (SFBC, Sables Fins Bien Calibres in French) is a Mediterranean community very well delimited by bathymetry (2-25 m) and sedimentology (>90% of fine sand) occurring in zones with relatively strong hydrodynamics. In this study focused on sites located along the Algerian, French, Italian and Spanish coasts of the Western Basin of the Mediterranean Sea (WBMS) we aim to compare the structure, ecological status and diversity of the macrofauna of the WSFS and examine the effects of recent human pressures on the state of this shallow macrobenthic community. We assess the ecological status and functioning of these WSFS using three categories of benthic indices: a) five indices based on classification of species into ecological groups, AMBI, BO2A, BPOFA, IQ and IP, b) the ITI index based on classification of species in trophic groups, and c) the Shannon H' index, and the Biological Traits Analysis (BTA), which is an alternative method to relative taxon composition analysis and integrative indices. Cluster analyses show that each zone show a particular taxonomic richness and dominant species. The seven benthic indices reveal that the macrobenthos of the WSFS of the four coastal zones show good or high Quality Status, except for one location on the Algerian coast (the Djendjen site) in 1997. BTA highlights the presence of three groups of species: 1) typical characteristic species; 2) indicator species of enrichment of fine particles and organic matter, and 3) coarsesand species which are accessorily found on fine sand. Finally, the WSFS which are naturally subject to regular natural physical perturbations show a high resilience after human pressures but are very sensitive to changes in the input of organic matter. (C) 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
RI lardicci, claudio/K-8698-2018
OI Sarda, Rafael/0000-0003-2059-9017
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 0269-7491
EI 1873-6424
PD MAY
PY 2017
VL 224
BP 336
EP 351
DI 10.1016/j.envpol.2017.02.013
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000399261400032
PM 28238365
ER

PT J
AU Stevenson, A
   Gahn, FJ
   Baumiller, TK
   Sevastopulo, GD
AF Stevenson, Angela
   Gahn, Forest J.
   Baumiller, Tomasz K.
   Sevastopulo, George D.
TI Predation on feather stars by regular echinoids as evidenced by
   laboratory and field observations and its paleobiological implications
SO PALEOBIOLOGY
DT Article
ID MESOZOIC MARINE REVOLUTION; GREAT-BARRIER-REEF; FLOROMETRA-SERRATISSIMA
   ECHINODERMATA; CHEMICAL DEFENSE; ARM REGENERATION; EVOLUTIONARY
   IMPLICATIONS; FUNCTIONAL-MORPHOLOGY; COMATULID CRINOIDS; STALKED
   CRINOIDS; RADIATION
AB Among extant crinoids, the feather stars are the most diverse and occupy the greatest bathymetric range, being especially common in reef environments. Feather stars possess a variety of morphological, behavioral and physiological traits that have been hypothesized to be critical to their success, especially in their ability to cope with predation. However, knowledge of their predators is exceptionally scant, consisting primarily of circumstantial evidence of attacks by fishes. In this study the question whether regular echinoids, recently shown to consume stalked crinoids, also consume feather stars is explored. Aquarium observations indicate that regular echinoids find feather stars palatable, including feather stars known to be distasteful to fish, and that regular echinoids can capture and eat live feather stars, including those known to swim. Gut-content analyses of the echinoid Araeosoma fenestratum (Thomson, 1872), which is commonly observed with large populations of the feather star Koehlermetra porrecta (Carpenter, 1888) in video transects from marine canyons off the coast of France, revealed elements of feather stars in the guts of 6 of 13 individuals. The high proportion of crinoid material (up to 90%), and the presence of articulated crinoid skeletal elements in the gut of A. fenestratum, suggest that these echinoids consumed at least some live crinoids, although they may have also ingested some postmortem remains found in the sediment. Additionally, photographic evidence from the northeast Atlantic suggests that another regular echinoid, Cidaris cidaris (Linnaeus, 1758), preys on feather stars. Thus in spite of the broad suite of antipredatory adaptations, feather stars are today subject to predation by regular echinoids and may have been since the Mesozoic, when this group of crinoids first appeared.
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 0094-8373
EI 1938-5331
PD MAY
PY 2017
VL 43
IS 2
BP 274
EP 285
DI 10.1017/pab.2016.39
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology;
   Evolutionary Biology; Paleontology
UT WOS:000399414600007
ER

PT J
AU Moore, JW
   Olden, JD
AF Moore, Jonathan W.
   Olden, Julian D.
TI Response diversity, nonnative species, and disassembly rules buffer
   freshwater ecosystem processes from anthropogenic change
SO GLOBAL CHANGE BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE biodiversity; ecosystem function; resilience; stream; urbanization
ID CURRENT KNOWLEDGE; EMPIRICAL-MODELS; CLIMATE-CHANGE; UNITED-STATES;
   LAND-USE; BIODIVERSITY; FISH; NUTRIENT; CONSERVATION; EXTINCTION
AB Integrating knowledge of environmental degradation, biodiversity change, and ecosystem processes across large spatial scales remains a key challenge to illuminating the resilience of earth's systems. There is now a growing realization that the manner in which communities will respond to anthropogenic impacts will ultimately control the ecosystem consequences. Here, we examine the response of freshwater fishes and their nutrient excretion -a key ecosystem process that can control aquatic productivity -to human land development across the contiguous United States. By linking a continental-scale dataset of 533 fish species from 8100 stream locations with species functional traits, nutrient excretion, and land remote sensing, we present four key findings. First, we provide the first geographic footprint of nutrient excretion by freshwater fishes across the United States and reveal distinct local-and continental-scale heterogeneity in community excretion rates. Second, fish species exhibited substantial response diversity in their sensitivity to land development; for native species, the more tolerant species were also the species contributing greater ecosystem function in terms of nutrient excretion. Third, by modeling increased land-use change and resultant shifts in fish community composition, land development is estimated to decrease fish nutrient excretion in the majority (63%) of ecoregions. Fourth, the loss of nutrient excretion would be 28% greater if biodiversity loss was random or 84% greater if there were no nonnative species. Thus, ecosystem processes are sensitive to increased anthropogenic degradation but biotic communities provide multiple pathways for resistance and this resistance varies across space.
TC 5
Z9 5
SN 1354-1013
EI 1365-2486
PD MAY
PY 2017
VL 23
IS 5
BP 1871
EP 1880
DI 10.1111/gcb.13536
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000397800600010
PM 27761971
ER

PT J
AU Whalen, MA
   Stachowicz, JJ
AF Whalen, Matthew A.
   Stachowicz, John J.
TI Suspension feeder diversity enhances community filtration rates in
   different flow environments
SO MARINE ECOLOGY PROGRESS SERIES
DT Article
DE Biodiversity-ecosystem functioning; Water filtration; Fouling community;
   Suspension feeding; Filter feeding; Size selectivity
ID MIXED-EFFECTS MODELS; MARINE BIODIVERSITY; ECOSYSTEM FUNCTION;
   SPECIES-DIVERSITY; UPSTREAM COLONIES; PARTICLE CAPTURE; FEEDING SUCCESS;
   FUNCTIONAL-ROLE; WATER-FLOW; SIZE
AB The functioning of ecosystems results from the interplay between living organisms and their surroundings. Therefore, our ability to predict eco-system functioning depends on our understanding of interactions between dynamic biotic and abiotic variables. Biodiversity can be influenced by the changes in the environment and can also influence ecosystem functioning, but our understanding of how environmental changes influence biodiversity-ecosystem functioning relationships remains limited. In coastal marine systems, water flow is a crucial determinant of resource delivery for sessile suspension-feeding animals and can potentially influence secondary production and the rate at which suspended materials are removed from water, determining water clarity, light penetration, and other key abiotic variables. We experimentally investigated how the presence and absence of water flow influenced phytoplankton consumption by suspension-feeder communities of varying species richness and composition. Consumer species richness enhanced filtration to the same degree in both flow conditions, despite generally decreased filtration in flow and considerable variation in the response to flow by consumers in monoculture. Species pairs filtered more than expected from monoculture performance, and species traits helped explain variance in these trends. However, there was no evidence of prey size selectivity by any consumer species, ruling this out as a mechanism underlying diversity effects. Our finding that the shape of the relationship between biodiversity and water filtration was identical in both flow conditions suggests that complementarity in this system is robust to at least one type of environmental variation.
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 0171-8630
EI 1616-1599
PD APR 27
PY 2017
VL 570
BP 1
EP 13
DI 10.3354/meps12133
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology;
   Oceanography
UT WOS:000400345700001
ER

PT J
AU Enriquez, S
   Mendez, ER
   Hoegh-Guldberg, O
   Iglesias-Prieto, R
AF Enriquez, Susana
   Mendez, Eugenio R.
   Hoegh-Guldberg, Ove
   Iglesias-Prieto, Roberto
TI Key functional role of the optical properties of coral skeletons in
   coral ecology and evolution
SO PROCEEDINGS OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY B-BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES
DT Article
DE multiple scattering; coral skeleton; coral morphology; colonial growth
   form; holobiont emergent traits
ID LIGHT-ABSORPTION; SCLERACTINIAN CORALS; MORPHOLOGICAL PLASTICITY; REEF;
   GROWTH; SCATTERING; COMPLEXITY; ORGANISMS; DOSIMETRY; MATRIX
AB Multiple scattering of light on coral skeleton enhances light absorption efficiency of coral symbionts and plays a key role in the regulation of their internal diffuse light field. To understand the dependence of this enhancement on skeleton meso-and macrostructure, we analysed the scattering abilities of naked coral skeletons for 74 Indo-Pacific species. Sensitive morphotypes to thermal and light stress, flat-extraplanate and branching corals, showed the most efficient structures, while massive-robust species were less efficient. The lowest light-enhancing scattering abilities were found for the most primitive colonial growth form: phaceloid. Accordingly, the development of highly efficient light-collecting structures versus the selection of less efficient but more robust holobionts to cope with light stress may constitute a trade-off in the evolution of modern symbiotic scleractinian corals, characterizing two successful adaptive solutions. The coincidence of the most important structural modifications with epitheca decline supports the importance of the enhancement of light transmission across coral skeleton in modern scleractinian diversification, and the central role of these symbioses in the design and optimization of coral skeleton. Furthermore, the same ability that lies at the heart of the success of symbiotic corals as coral-reef-builders can also explain the 'Achilles's heel' of these symbioses in a warming ocean.
OI Mendez, Eugenio R./0000-0002-7042-8622; Enriquez,
   Susana/0000-0001-5776-902X
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 0962-8452
EI 1471-2954
PD APR 26
PY 2017
VL 284
IS 1853
AR 20161667
DI 10.1098/rspb.2016.1667
SC Life Sciences & Biomedicine - Other Topics; Environmental Sciences &
   Ecology; Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000400166400001
PM 28446691
ER

PT J
AU Nino-Garcia, JP
   Ruiz-Gonzalez, C
   del Giorgio, PA
AF Pablo Nino-Garcia, Juan
   Ruiz-Gonzalez, Clara
   del Giorgio, Paul A.
TI Exploring the Ecological Coherence between the Spatial and Temporal
   Patterns of Bacterioplankton in Boreal Lakes
SO FRONTIERS IN MICROBIOLOGY
DT Article
DE aquatic bacterial communities; boreal lakes; abundance distributions;
   temporal-spatial relationship; temporal recruitment; mass effects;
   environmental sorting; rare biosphere
ID SPECIES ABUNDANCE DISTRIBUTIONS; BACTERIAL COMMUNITIES; MICROBIAL
   DIVERSITY; RARE BIOSPHERE; FUNCTIONAL TRAITS; BETA DIVERSITY; COASTAL
   OCEAN; CORE; BIOGEOGRAPHY; TIME
AB One of the major contemporary challenges in microbial ecology has been to discriminate the reactive core from the random, unreactive components of bacterial communities. In previous work we used the spatial abundance distributions of bacterioplankton across boreal lakes of Quebec to group taxa into four distinct categories that reflect either hydrology-mediated dispersal along the aquatic network or environmental selection mechanisms within lakes. Here, we test whether this categorization derived from the spatial distribution of taxa is maintained over time, by analyzing the temporal dynamics of the operational taxonomic units (OTUs) within those spatially derived categories along an annual cycle in the oligotrophic lake Croche (Quebec, Canada), and assessing the coherence in the patterns of abundance, occurrence, and environmental range of these OTUs over space and time. We report that the temporal dynamics of most taxa within a single lake are largely coherent with those derived from their spatial distribution over large spatial scales, suggesting that these properties must be intrinsic of particular taxa. We also identified a set of rare taxa cataloged as having a random occupancy based on their spatial distribution, but which showed clear seasonality and abundance peaks along the year, yet these comprised a very small fraction of the total rare OTUs. We conclude that the presence of most rare bacterioplankton taxa in boreal lakes is random, since both their temporal and spatial dynamics suggest links to passive downstream transport and persistence in freshwater networks, rather than environmental selection.
RI Ruiz-Gonzalez, Clara/K-7782-2017
OI Ruiz Gonzalez, Clara/0000-0003-3568-4943; Nino-Garcia, Juan
   Pablo/0000-0003-1610-3998
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 1664-302X
PD APR 21
PY 2017
VL 8
AR 636
DI 10.3389/fmicb.2017.00636
SC Microbiology
UT WOS:000399767300001
PM 28484431
ER

PT J
AU Raharinirina, NA
   Brandt, G
   Merico, A
AF Raharinirina, N. Alexia
   Brandt, Gunnar
   Merico, Agostino
TI A Trait-Based Model for Describing the Adaptive Dynamics of Coral-Algae
   Symbiosis
SO FRONTIERS IN ECOLOGY AND EVOLUTION
DT Article
DE host; endosymbiont; adaptation; symbiotic trait; cost-benefit; trade-off
ID HOST CONTROL; EVOLUTION; MUTUALISMS; LIGHT; ZOOXANTHELLAE; DIVERSITY;
   REEFS
AB The survival of many ecological communities relies on the symbiotic relationships formed by various organisms. An example of a symbiotic association that is often described as mutualistic is the one between corals and algae. Since the algae are located within coral epidermis, they are referred to as "endosymbiont" (more generally "symbiont") whereas the corals are referred to as "host." This association is based on the exchange of photosynthetically fixed carbon from algae to corals and inorganic nutrients, acquired from animal waste metabolites or directly from seawater, from corals to algae. The evolution of this symbiotic relationship has enabled the emergence of highly productive and diverse coral reef ecosystems in nutrient-poor waters of the tropical oceans. Here we present an adaptive, trait-based model that describes the temporal dynamics of this association. Given that corals control the flux of inorganic nutrients to the algae, we focus on the adaptation of a hypothetical trait expressed by the coral population: investment of energy in the symbiotic relationship. Investment of energy produces losses for the corals that reflect costs for algal photosynthetic efficiency and for sustaining and maintaining the symbiont population. The fitness of the coral is modeled as the net benefit obtained by the symbiotic association. The model features a decrease in the fraction of energy invested by the corals with increasing symbiont to host biomass ratio. Our sensitivity analyses show that the best conditions for the survival of the simulated coral-algae community occur for a broad range of symbiont to host biomass ratio if the costs of symbiosis are low. With increasing costs, the survival region narrows down to a smaller range of symbiont to host biomass ratio. Finally, a break down of the symbiotic relationship and a consequent collapse of the coral-algae system occur under shock changes in algal abundance.
OI Merico, Agostino/0000-0001-8095-8056; Raharinirina, Nomenjanahary
   Alexia/0000-0003-1253-8927
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 2296-701X
PD APR 18
PY 2017
VL 5
AR UNSP 31
DI 10.3389/fevo.2017.00031
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000451561000002
ER

PT J
AU Smith, DAE
   Smith, YCE
   Downs, CT
AF Smith, David A. Ehlers
   Smith, Yvette C. Ehlers
   Downs, Colleen T.
TI Indian Ocean coastal thicket is of high conservation value for
   preserving taxonomic and functional diversity of forest-dependent bird
   communities in a landscape of restricted forest availability
SO FOREST ECOLOGY AND MANAGEMENT
DT Article
DE Ecosystem services; Forest fragmentation; Forest regeneration; Habitat
   structure; RLQ analysis; Trait space
ID HABITAT FRAGMENTATION; TROPICAL FORESTS; PROTECTED AREAS; SOUTHERN
   AFRICA; SPECIES TRAITS; BIODIVERSITY; RESPONSES; BIOGEOGRAPHY;
   ASSEMBLAGES; RICHNESS
AB The Indian Ocean Coastal Belt Forest is extremely biodiverse but is threatened by anthropogenic land-use change. In South Africa, remnant forest patches are divided into highly restricted but protected indigenous forest (IF) and abundant but unprotected coastal thicket/dense bush (DB), which likely represents secondary/regenerating IF. We tested the hypothesis that DB had value for conserving forest dependent avian taxonomic and functional diversity, as (a) DB is situated with in the forestanthropogenic land-use mosaic and (b) birds maintain diverse ecosystem functions and are sensitive to environmental change given their varied biological traits. We conducted 149 and 112 fixed-radius point-count surveys of avian communities in 99, and 24, patches of DB and IF, respectively, at each location recording microhabitat vegetation structure. We compared vegetation characteristics and taxonomic species richness between vegetation classes, and tested the breadth of functional trait-space and for significant associations with vegetation structures at each survey location, using RLQ analysis. Vegetation classes differed significantly, but floral species overlap and vegetation structures in DB closely resembled regenerating IF habitat. Specialist ground-nesting and insect-gleaning species corresponded to taller, more diverse IF structures. Other biological traits and total species richness overlapped broadly across both classes, but IF had significantly higher mean species richness. Given the relatively high taxonomic and functional diversity of the avian community in the abundant DB, the scarcity of IF, and the proximity of DB to the anthropogenic land-use mosaic, we recommend allocating suitable DB patches to the Protected Area Network, which may simultaneously help preserve avian taxonomic and functional diversity, facilitate colonisation throughout the fragmented landscape and provide ecosystem services to anthropogenic land uses. (C) 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
RI Downs, Colleen/A-7770-2010
OI Downs, Colleen/0000-0001-8334-1510; Ehlers Smith,
   David/0000-0002-6357-0751; Ehlers Smith, Yvette/0000-0002-2564-7359
TC 5
Z9 5
SN 0378-1127
EI 1872-7042
PD APR 15
PY 2017
VL 390
BP 157
EP 165
DI 10.1016/j.foreco.2017.01.034
SC Forestry
UT WOS:000398873700016
ER

PT J
AU Thrush, SF
   Hewitt, JE
   Kraan, C
   Lohrer, AM
   Pilditch, CA
   Douglas, E
AF Thrush, Simon F.
   Hewitt, Judi E.
   Kraan, Casper
   Lohrer, A. M.
   Pilditch, Conrad A.
   Douglas, Emily
TI Changes in the location of biodiversity - ecosystem function hot spots
   across the seafloor landscape with increasing sediment nutrient loading
SO PROCEEDINGS OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY B-BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES
DT Article
DE biodiversity-ecosystem function; nitrogen dynamics; biodiversity
   function indicators; ecosystem services; landscape scale; permeable
   marine sediments
ID PLANT DIVERSITY; INTERTIDAL SANDFLATS; MARINE BIODIVERSITY; MULTIPLE
   TRAITS; PRODUCTIVITY; CONSEQUENCES; WORLD; COMMUNITIES; EXTINCTION;
   ENRICHMENT
AB Declining biodiversity and loss of ecosystem function threatens the ability of habitats to contribute ecosystem services. However, the form of the relationship between biodiversity and ecosystem function (BEF) and how relationships change with environmental change is poorly understood. This limits our ability to predict the consequences of biodiversity loss on ecosystem function, particularly in real-world marine ecosystems that are species rich, and where multiple ecosystem functions are represented by multiple indicators. We investigated spatial variation in BEF relationships across a 300 000 m(2) intertidal sandflat by nesting experimental manipulations of sediment pore water nitrogen concentration into sites with contrasting macro-benthic community composition. Our results highlight the significance of many different elements of biodiversity associated with environmental characteristics, community structure, functional diversity, ecological traits or particular species (ecosystem engineers) to important functions of coastal marine sediments (benthic oxygen consumption, ammonium pore water concentrations and flux across the sediment-water interface). Using the BEF relationships developed from our experiment, we demonstrate patchiness across a landscape in functional performance and the potential for changes in the location of functional hot and cold spots with increasing nutrient loading that have important implications for mapping and predicating change in functionality and the concomitant delivery of ecosystem services.
OI Kraan, Casper/0000-0003-2062-6222
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 0962-8452
EI 1471-2954
PD APR 12
PY 2017
VL 284
IS 1852
AR 20162861
DI 10.1098/rspb.2016.2861
SC Life Sciences & Biomedicine - Other Topics; Environmental Sciences &
   Ecology; Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000399294100008
PM 28404774
ER

PT J
AU Razzaque, S
   Haque, T
   Elias, SM
   Rahman, MS
   Biswas, S
   Schwartz, S
   Ismail, AM
   Walia, H
   Juenger, TE
   Seraj, ZI
AF Razzaque, Samsad
   Haque, Taslima
   Elias, Sabrina M.
   Rahman, Md. Sazzadur
   Biswas, Sudip
   Schwartz, Scott
   Ismail, Abdelbagi M.
   Walia, Harkamal
   Juenger, Thomas E.
   Seraj, Zeba I.
TI Reproductive stage physiological and transcriptional responses to
   salinity stress in reciprocal populations derived from tolerant
   (Horkuch) and susceptible (IR29) rice
SO SCIENTIFIC REPORTS
DT Article
ID QUANTITATIVE TRAIT LOCUS; ORYZA-SATIVA L.; SALT TOLERANCE;
   GENE-EXPRESSION; ABIOTIC STRESS; SODIUM-TRANSPORT; ABSCISIC-ACID;
   ZINC-FINGER; DROUGHT; PLANTS
AB Global increase in salinity levels has made it imperative to identify novel sources of genetic variation for tolerance traits, especially in rice. The rice landrace Horkuch, endemic to the saline coastal area of Bangladesh, was used in this study as the source of tolerance in reciprocal crosses with the sensitive but high-yielding IR29 variety for discovering transcriptional variation associated with salt tolerance in the resulting populations. The cytoplasmic effect of the Horkuch background in leaves under stress showed functional enrichment for signal transduction, DNA-dependent regulation and transport activities. In roots the enrichment was for cell wall organization and macromolecule biosynthesis. In contrast, the cytoplasmic effect of IR29 showed upregulation of apoptosis and downregulation of phosphorylation across tissues relative to Horkuch. Differential gene expression in leaves of the sensitive population showed downregulation of GO processes like photosynthesis, ATP biosynthesis and ion transport. Roots of the tolerant plants conversely showed upregulation of GO terms like G-protein coupled receptor pathway, membrane potential and cation transport. Furthermore, genes involved in regulating membrane potentials were constitutively expressed only in the roots of tolerant individuals. Overall our work has developed genetic resources and elucidated the likely mechanisms associated with the tolerance response of the Horkuch genotype.
OI seraj, zeba/0000-0002-1702-8574
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 2045-2322
PD APR 11
PY 2017
VL 7
AR 46138
DI 10.1038/srep46138
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000399181600001
PM 28397857
ER

PT J
AU Martins, GM
   Matias, MG
   Moniz, I
   Rius, C
   Sanderson, J
   Neto, AI
   Jenkins, SR
AF Martins, Gustavo M.
   Matias, Miguel G.
   Moniz, Isadora
   Rius, Carlos
   Sanderson, Josephine
   Neto, Ana I.
   Jenkins, Stuart R.
TI Post-settlement dispersal ability determines structure of marine benthic
   metacommunities
SO MARINE ECOLOGY PROGRESS SERIES
DT Article
DE Biological traits; Community assembly; Experimental habitats; Habitat
   size; Isolation; Scale
ID PEN SHELL COMMUNITIES; MACROFAUNAL ASSEMBLAGES; METAPOPULATION DYNAMICS;
   SPECIES-DIVERSITY; HABITAT; COMPLEXITY; TURF; SIZE; VARIABILITY;
   LANDSCAPE
AB Changes in natural habitats and the community response to such changes have important impacts on the distribution of diversity. Theoretical advances have highlighted the importance of including dispersal traits to predict responses to habitat loss, but empirical evidence is lacking. We investigated the effect of metacommunity size (by manipulating the number of habitat patches) and isolation (by manipulating proximity to reefs) in structuring marine macro-faunal communities. The overall response of macrofauna to changes in habitat size and proximity to reefs varied according to the species' ability to disperse after settlement. Whilst the richness of species with sessile adult stages responded to proximity to reefs in which metacommunities were deployed, species with motile adult stages responded to metacommunity size. Results were similar at both the patch and metacommunity scales. A subsequent experiment showed that colonisation had an impact on the macrofaunal responses to reef proximity, which persisted throughout the community assembly process. The inclusion of simple functional traits (i.e. post-settlement dispersal) allows a better understanding of species responses to the spatial configuration of habitats at multiple ecological scales, which may be key for predicting the consequences of habitat loss.
RI Neto, Ana Isabel/C-1505-2010; Scientific Productivity,
   CIIMAR/N-6498-2017; Martins, Gustavo/A-8857-2008; Scientific output,
   CIIMAR/E-5122-2012
OI Neto, Ana Isabel/0000-0003-0708-5636; Scientific Productivity,
   CIIMAR/0000-0002-3703-4402; Martins, Gustavo/0000-0001-5051-2221;
   Scientific output, CIIMAR/0000-0001-6270-2153; Matias,
   Miguel/0000-0001-9198-2051
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0171-8630
EI 1616-1599
PD APR 7
PY 2017
VL 569
BP 15
EP 23
DI 10.3354/meps12108
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology;
   Oceanography
UT WOS:000400344700002
ER

PT J
AU Sullivan, SMP
   Manning, DWP
AF Sullivan, S. Mazeika P.
   Manning, David W. P.
TI Seasonally distinct taxonomic and functional shifts in macroinvertebrate
   communities following dam removal
SO PEERJ
DT Article
DE Aquatic invertebrates; Diversity; Lowhead dams; River restoration;
   Thresholds
ID LOW-HEAD DAM; FISH ASSEMBLAGES; LOWHEAD DAMS; NUISANCE PARAMETER; FLOW
   REGULATION; RIVER SYSTEMS; STREAM; DISTURBANCE; HABITAT; RESPONSES
AB Dam removal is an increasingly popular restoration tool, but our understanding of ecological responses to dam removal over time is still in the early stages. We quantified seasonal benthic macroinvertebrate density, taxonomic composition, and functional traits for three years after lowhead dam removal in three reaches of the Olentangy River (Ohio, USA): two upstream of former dam (one restored, one unrestored), and one downstream of former dam. Macroinvertebrate community density, generic richness, and Shannon-Wiener diversity decreased between similar to 9 and similar to 15 months after dam removal; all three variables consistently increased thereafter. These threshold responses were dependent on reach location: density and richness increased similar to 15 months after removal in upstream reaches versus similar to 19 months downstream of the former dam. Initial macroinvertebrate density declines were likely related to seasonality or life-history characteristics, but density increased up to 2.27 X from year to year in three out of four seasons (late autumn, early spring, summer) across all reaches. Macroinvertebrate community composition was similar among the three reaches, but differed seasonally based on non-metric multidimensional scaling (NMDS) and analysis of similarity (ANOSIM). Seasonal differences among communities tended to decrease after dam removal. We detected community-wide shifts in functional traits such as multivoltinism, depositional habitat use, burrowing, and collector-gatherer feeding mode. We observed that these traits were expressed most strongly with Chironomidae, which was the most abundant family. Our results suggest that seasonal environmental conditions can play a role in the response and recovery of macroinvertebrate communities-often used to monitor ecosystem condition- following dam removal. In particular, macroinvertebrate density and diversity can show recovery after dam removal, especially in seasons when macroinvertebrate density is typically lowest, with concomitant changes to functional trait abundance. Thus, we recommend scientists and managers consider responses to dam removal throughout the year. Further, similar density, generic richness, and functional traits among reaches suggest that channel restoration after dam removal may initially have equivocal effects on invertebrate communities.
OI Sullivan, Mazeika/0000-0003-2341-5316
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 2167-8359
PD APR 6
PY 2017
VL 5
AR UNSP e3189
DI 10.7717/peerj.3189
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000398662600005
PM 28396827
ER

PT J
AU Johansson, D
   Pereyra, RT
   Rafajlovic, M
   Johannesson, K
AF Johansson, Daniel
   Pereyra, Ricardo T.
   Rafajlovic, Marina
   Johannesson, Kerstin
TI Reciprocal transplants support a plasticity-first scenario during
   colonisation of a large hyposaline basin by a marine macro alga
SO BMC ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE Common garden; Reciprocal transplant; Salinity; Asexual reproduction;
   Fucus vecisulosus; Fucus radicans; Baltic Sea
ID FUCUS-VESICULOSUS PHAEOPHYCEAE; BRACKISH BALTIC SEA; LOCAL ADAPTATION;
   CLIMATE-CHANGE; RADICANS; POPULATIONS; GROWTH; EVOLUTIONARY; SPECIATION;
   CLONALITY
AB Background: Establishing populations in ecologically marginal habitats may require substantial phenotypic changes that come about through phenotypic plasticity, local adaptation, or both. West-Eberhard's "plasticity-first"model suggests that plasticity allows for rapid colonisation of a new environment, followed by directional selection that develops local adaptation. Two predictions from this model are that (i) individuals of the original population have high enough plasticity to survive and reproduce in the marginal environment, and (ii) individuals of the marginal population show evidence of local adaptation. Individuals of the macroalga Fucus vesiculosus from the North Sea colonised the hyposaline (>= 2-3%(0) Baltic Sea less than 8000 years ago. The colonisation involved a switch from fully sexual to facultative asexual recruitment with release of adventitious branches that grow rhizoids and attach to the substratum. To test the predictions from the plasticity-first model we reciprocally transplanted F. vesiculosus from the original population (ambient salinity 24%) and from the marginal population inside the Baltic Sea (ambient salinity 4%). We also transplanted individuals of the Baltic endemic sister species F. radicans from 4 to 24%. We assessed the degree of plasticity and local adaptation in growth and reproductive traits after 6 months by comparing the performance of individuals in 4 and 24%.
   Results: Branches of all individuals survived the 6 months period in both salinities, but grew better in their native salinity. Baltic Sea individuals more frequently developed asexual traits while North Sea individuals initiated formation of receptacles for sexual reproduction.
   Conclusions: Marine individuals of F. vesiculosus are highly plastic with respect to salinity and North Sea populations can survive the extreme hyposaline conditions of the Baltic Sea without selective mortality. Plasticity alone would thus allow for an initial establishment of this species inside the postglacial Baltic Sea at salinities where reproduction remains functional. Since establishment, the Baltic Sea populations have evolved adaptations to extreme hyposaline waters and have in addition evolved asexual recruitment that, however, tends to impede local adaptation. Overall, our results support the "plasticity-first"model for the initial colonisation of the Baltic Sea by Fucus vesiculosus.
OI Rafajlovic, Marina/0000-0003-2177-4622; Johannesson,
   Kerstin/0000-0003-0176-7986
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 1472-6785
PD APR 5
PY 2017
VL 17
AR 14
DI 10.1186/s12898-017-0124-1
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000398615600001
PM 28381278
ER

PT J
AU Gross, C
   Donoghue, C
   Pruitt, C
   Trimble, AC
   Ruesink, JL
AF Gross, Collin
   Donoghue, Cinde
   Pruitt, Casey
   Trimble, Alan C.
   Ruesink, Jennifer L.
TI Taxonomic and functional assessment of mesopredator diversity across an
   estuarine habitat mosaic
SO ECOSPHERE
DT Article
DE functional diversity; mesopredators; seagrass; structured habitat;
   Zostera marina
ID COASTAL ECOSYSTEMS; SEAGRASS MEADOWS; FISH COMMUNITIES; BIODIVERSITY;
   EELGRASS; ASSEMBLAGES; PACIFIC; VEGETATION; ASSOCIATIONS; COEXISTENCE
AB A long-standing rule in ecology is that structural complexity increases abundance and diversity of organisms, but this paradigm glosses over potential trait-specific benefits of habitat structure across different regional species pools. We tested this idea using multiple response variables emphasizing taxonomic and functional diversity in seagrass-vegetated, edge, and unvegetated habitats across three estuaries in Washington State (USA). We also used these variables in tandem to evaluate functional redundancy as a proxy for ecosystem resistance and resilience. The estuaries spanned a twofold range in richness of meso-predatory fishes and decapods. Increases in per-sample abundance with habitat structure were confined to three of seven functional groups, specifically those occupying the water column or directly associated with seagrass shoots. Consequently, seagrass reduced mesopredator diversity by reducing evenness. Habitats differed in mesopredator assemblages despite their spatial proximity (similar to 3 m), supported by multivariate analyses performed at functional and taxonomic resolutions, but site differences were less apparent functionally than taxonomically. Functional redundancy did not differ by habitat, but increased with the richness of the regional species pool. Edge habitats were generally intermediate in community structure, per-sample abundance, and diversity between seagrass and unvegetated habitats. Structural complexity provided a trait-specific enhancement of abundance, and this pattern applied across species pools. Because seagrass benefits species with certain traits, management focused on the low-intertidal estuarine habitat mosaic, rather than a particular habitat type, and on places where redundancy is already low, best supports mesopredator diversity and function.
OI Gross, Collin/0000-0002-0896-8476
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 2150-8925
PD APR
PY 2017
VL 8
IS 4
AR e01792
DI 10.1002/ecs2.1792
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000400985300040
ER

PT J
AU Fodelianakis, S
   Moustakas, A
   Papageorgiou, N
   Manoli, O
   Tsikopoulou, I
   Michoud, G
   Daffonchio, D
   Karakassis, I
   Ladoukakis, ED
AF Fodelianakis, S.
   Moustakas, A.
   Papageorgiou, N.
   Manoli, O.
   Tsikopoulou, I.
   Michoud, G.
   Daffonchio, D.
   Karakassis, I.
   Ladoukakis, E. D.
TI Modified niche optima and breadths explain the historical contingency of
   bacterial community responses to eutrophication in coastal sediments
SO MOLECULAR ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE adaptation; bacterial communities; community resistance; disturbance;
   environmental history
ID ORGANIC ENRICHMENT; ECOSYSTEMS; SOIL; PATTERNS; SPECIALIST; DISPERSAL;
   DIVERSITY; SEQUENCES; TRAITS; TAXA
AB Previous studies have shown that the response of bacterial communities to disturbances depends on their environmental history. Historically fluctuating habitats host communities that respond better to disturbance than communities of historically stable habitats. However, the exact ecological mechanism that drives this dependency remains unknown. Here, we experimentally demonstrate that modifications of niche optima and niche breadths of the community members are driving this dependency of bacterial responses to past environmental conditions. First, we develop a novel, simple method to calculate the niche optima and breadths of bacterial taxa regarding single environmental gradients. Then, we test this method on sediment bacterial communities of three habitats, one historically stable and less loaded and two historically more variable and more loaded habitats in terms of historical chlorophyll- water concentration, that we subject to hypoxia via organic matter addition ex situ. We find that communities containing bacterial taxa differently adapted to hypoxia show different structural and functional responses, depending on the sediment's environmental history. Specifically, in the historically less fluctuating and loaded sediments where we find more taxa poorly adapted to hypoxic conditions, communities change a lot over time and organic matter is not degraded efficiently. The opposite is true for the historically more fluctuating and loaded sediments where we find more taxa well adapted to hypoxia. Based on the community responses observed here, we also propose an alternative calculation of community resistance that takes into account how rapidly the communities respond to disturbances and not just the initial and final states of the community.
RI Michoud, Gregoire/F-4509-2015
OI Michoud, Gregoire/0000-0003-1071-9900; Karakassis,
   Ioannis/0000-0001-8799-4375; Papageorgiou, Nafsika/0000-0003-3039-7910;
   Daffonchio, Daniele/0000-0003-0947-925X; Moustakas, Aristides
   (Aris)/0000-0002-6334-747X; Fodelianakis, Stilianos/0000-0003-2186-6009
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 0962-1083
EI 1365-294X
PD APR
PY 2017
VL 26
IS 7
SI SI
BP 2006
EP 2018
DI 10.1111/mec.13842
SC Biochemistry & Molecular Biology; Environmental Sciences & Ecology;
   Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000399639200024
PM 27662109
ER

PT J
AU Twining, CW
   Palkovacs, EP
   Friedman, MA
   Hasselman, DJ
   Post, DM
AF Twining, Cornelia W.
   Palkovacs, Eric P.
   Friedman, Maya A.
   Hasselman, Daniel J.
   Post, David M.
TI Nutrient loading by anadromous fishes: species-specific contributions
   and the effects of diversity
SO CANADIAN JOURNAL OF FISHERIES AND AQUATIC SCIENCES
DT Article
ID PACIFIC SALMON ONCORHYNCHUS; MARINE-DERIVED NUTRIENTS; FRESH-WATER
   ECOSYSTEMS; AMERICAN SHAD; ALOSA-PSEUDOHARENGUS; SPAWNING MIGRATION;
   SOCKEYE-SALMON; LIFE-HISTORY; FOOD WEBS; ALEWIFE
AB Anadromous fishes exhibit diverse life history and functional traits. Spawning anadromous fishes bring nutrients to fresh waters, and their life history and functional traits can influence nutrient loading patterns. We asked how nutrient inputs varied across 12 species of North American anadromous fishes and how these patterns affected river-wide trends in nutrient loading. We used portfolio effect analyses to assess whether diversity stabilized or destabilized nutrient inputs to freshwater ecosystems over time. Recent decreases in body size reduced per individual nutrient loading for several key species, which in turn decreased cumulative loading. Invasion also altered nutrient loading; non-native American shad (Alosa sapidissima) now provide nearly half of the annual marine-derived nutrient inputs to the Columbia River. Counter to expectations, species diversity (richness and evenness) did not significantly increase the stability of nutrient inputs to fresh waters. Species loss in the Connecticut River increased stability, while species gain in the Columbia River decreased stability.
RI Post, David/A-6987-2009
OI Post, David/0000-0003-1434-7729
TC 10
Z9 10
SN 0706-652X
EI 1205-7533
PD APR
PY 2017
VL 74
IS 4
BP 609
EP 619
DI 10.1139/cjfas-2016-0136
SC Fisheries; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000398836600018
ER

PT J
AU Vinagre, PA
   Verissimo, H
   Pais-Costa, AJ
   Hawkins, SJ
   Borja, A
   Marques, JC
   Magalhaes Neto, J
AF Vinagre, Pedro Almeida
   Verissimo, Helena
   Pais-Costa, Antonia Juliana
   Hawkins, Stephen John
   Borja, Angel
   Marques, Joao Carlos
   Magalhaes Neto, Joao
TI Do structural and functional attributes show concordant responses to
   disturbance ? Evidence from rocky shore macroinvertebrate communities
SO ECOLOGICAL INDICATORS
DT Article
DE Benthos Biological traits analysis; Taxonomic diversity; Functional
   diversity; Organic enrichment
ID MARINE BENTHIC ECOSYSTEMS; WESTERN ENGLISH-CHANNEL; BIOLOGICAL TRAITS;
   INTERTIDAL COMMUNITY; ECOLOGICAL QUALITY; PORTUGUESE COAST; SPECIES
   TRAITS; CLIMATE-CHANGE; DIVERSITY; ASSEMBLAGES
AB The utility and concordance of application of taxonomic-based (diversity, richness and composition) and functional-based (biological traits analysis and functional diversity indices) metrics to distinguish anthropogenic disturbance or stress gradients (e.g., nutrient enrichment) on intertidal rocky shores were explored using macroinvertebrate communities. Metrics from both approaches showed similar trends in the variation of communities along the gradients, in which higher ecological health was found in less disturbed sites (farthest from the disturbance source), with the converse at more stressful sites (close to the disturbance source). The functional-based approach, using biological traits analysis and functional diversity indices, showed potential to be included in monitoring programmes at rocky shores alongside taxonomic-based metrics. (C) 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
RI Borja, Angel/I-3665-2018
OI Borja, Angel/0000-0003-1601-2025; Vinagre, Pedro/0000-0003-1150-8355;
   Verissimo, Helena/0000-0003-3971-8696; Neto, Joao/0000-0002-9033-3671;
   MARQUES, JOAO CARLOS/0000-0001-8865-8189; Costa,
   Juliana/0000-0002-1701-1027
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 1470-160X
EI 1872-7034
PD APR
PY 2017
VL 75
BP 57
EP 72
DI 10.1016/j.ecolind.2016.12.023
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000398334600008
ER

PT J
AU Teresa, FB
   Casatti, L
AF Teresa, Fabricio Barreto
   Casatti, Lilian
TI Trait-based metrics as bioindicators: Responses of stream fish
   assemblages to a gradient of environmental degradation
SO ECOLOGICAL INDICATORS
DT Article
DE Bioindicators; Context-dependent; Functional diversity; Trait-based
   metrics
ID FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; LAND-USE; SPECIES RICHNESS; COMMUNITIES;
   BIODIVERSITY; LANDSCAPE; ECOLOGY; CONSERVATION; ECOSYSTEMS; REDUNDANCY
AB The development of biomonitoring tools is increasingly appealing in light of the increasing degradation of aquatic ecosystems. In this context, we investigated the responses of stream fish communities to the gradient of environmental degradation in different basins using a variety of indices based on functional diversity, functional composition, and taxonomic diversity. We used datasets from three Brazilian ecoregions. In order to describe the gradient of environmental degradation we scored streams based on local and landscape variables. The functional structure of the assemblages was described in relation to seven functional traits related to habitat use, swimming capacity, and maneuverability. We described assemblages in each ecoregion separately in relation to 20 potential indicators, grouped in four families: indices of functional diversity based on presence/absence (FDp/a); indices of functional diversity weighted by abundance (FDabund); indices of functional composition (mT); and, indices based on taxonomic diversity (TDiv). The relationship between the indicators and the gradient of environmental degradation were evaluated using linear regression. We found a significant interaction effect (ANOVA, p = 0.006) between group of indices and ecoregions for the performance of indicators, suggesting a context -dependent response. The indices, on an individual basis, had variable performance and consistency among ecoregions. Four mT indicators demonstrated the highest average performance and consistency. Taxonomic diversity indicators consistently had the lowest average performance, while FDp/a and FDabund indicators had low average performance and variable inter-regional consistency. The differential inter-regional performance of indicators was due to the differences in the lengths of the gradients of environmental degradation. Our results indicate that functional traits have greater predictive power compared to taxonomic indicators for fish responses to a gradient of environmental degradation. Although indicators of functional composition are the most promising, we emphasize that caution is needed when generalizing functional diversity indicators across ecoregions because most of them are context-dependent. (C) 2016 Published by Elsevier Ltd.
RI Teresa, Fabricio/F-7885-2012
OI Teresa, Fabricio/0000-0002-1357-4391
TC 5
Z9 6
SN 1470-160X
EI 1872-7034
PD APR
PY 2017
VL 75
BP 249
EP 258
DI 10.1016/j.ecolind.2016.12.061
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000398334600027
ER

PT J
AU Boyles, RE
   Pfeiffer, BK
   Cooper, EA
   Rauh, BL
   Zielinski, KJ
   Myers, MT
   Brenton, Z
   Rooney, WL
   Kresovich, S
AF Boyles, Richard E.
   Pfeiffer, Brian K.
   Cooper, Elizabeth A.
   Rauh, Bradley L.
   Zielinski, Kelsey J.
   Myers, Matthew T.
   Brenton, Zachary
   Rooney, William L.
   Kresovich, Stephen
TI Genetic dissection of sorghum grain quality traits using diverse and
   segregating populations
SO THEORETICAL AND APPLIED GENETICS
DT Article
ID BICOLOR L. MOENCH; INFRARED REFLECTANCE SPECTROSCOPY; MAIZE KERNEL
   COMPOSITION; GENOME-WIDE ASSOCIATION; ETHANOL-PRODUCTION;
   GLUTAMATE-DEHYDROGENASE; PROTEIN DIGESTIBILITY; FUNCTIONAL-PROPERTIES;
   NUTRITIONAL-VALUE; GROSS ENERGY
AB Coordinated association and linkage mapping identified 25 grain quality QTLs in multiple environments, and fine mapping of the Wx locus supports the use of high-density genetic markers in linkage mapping.
   There is a wide range of end-use products made from cereal grains, and these products often demand different grain characteristics. Fortunately, cereal crop species including sorghum [Sorghum bicolor (L.) Moench] contain high phenotypic variation for traits influencing grain quality. Identifying genetic variants underlying this phenotypic variation allows plant breeders to develop genotypes with grain attributes optimized for their intended usage. Multiple sorghum mapping populations were rigorously phenotyped across two environments (SC Coastal Plain and Central TX) in 2 years for five major grain quality traits: amylose, starch, crude protein, crude fat, and gross energy. Coordinated association and linkage mapping revealed several robust QTLs that make prime targets to improve grain quality for food, feed, and fuel products. Although the amylose QTL interval spanned many megabases, the marker with greatest significance was located just 12 kb from waxy (Wx), the primary gene regulating amylose production in cereal grains. This suggests higher resolution mapping in recombinant inbred line (RIL) populations can be obtained when genotyped at a high marker density. The major QTL for crude fat content, identified in both a RIL population and grain sorghum diversity panel, encompassed the DGAT1 locus, a critical gene involved in maize lipid biosynthesis. Another QTL on chromosome 1 was consistently mapped in both RIL populations for multiple grain quality traits including starch, crude protein, and gross energy. Collectively, these genetic regions offer excellent opportunities to manipulate grain composition and set up future studies for gene validation.
OI Boyles, Richard/0000-0003-1366-7659; Cooper,
   Elizabeth/0000-0002-2688-7418
TC 4
Z9 5
SN 0040-5752
EI 1432-2242
PD APR
PY 2017
VL 130
IS 4
BP 697
EP 716
DI 10.1007/s00122-016-2844-6
SC Agriculture; Plant Sciences; Genetics & Heredity
UT WOS:000398737400006
ER

PT J
AU Jonsson, M
   Burrows, RM
   Lidman, J
   Faltstrom, E
   Laudon, H
   Sponseller, RA
AF Jonsson, Micael
   Burrows, Ryan M.
   Lidman, Johan
   Faltstrom, Emma
   Laudon, Hjalmar
   Sponseller, Ryan A.
TI Land use influences macroinvertebrate community composition in boreal
   headwaters through altered stream conditions
SO AMBIO
DT Article
DE Aquatic insects; Biodiversity; Forestry; Functional traits
ID ECOSYSTEM FUNCTION; RIVER CONTINUUM; FOREST SOILS; DIVERSITY; CATCHMENT;
   NITROGEN; ECOLOGY; TRAITS; BIODIVERSITY; PHOSPHORUS
AB Land use is known to alter the nature of land-water interactions, but the potential effects of widespread forest management on headwaters in boreal regions remain poorly understood. We evaluated the importance of catchment land use, land cover, and local stream variables for macroinvertebrate community and functional trait diversity in 18 boreal headwater streams. Variation in macroinvertebrate metrics was often best explained by in-stream variables, primarily water chemistry (e.g. pH). However, variation in stream variables was, in turn, significantly associated with catchment-scale forestry land use. More specifically, streams running through catchments that were dominated by young (11-50 years) forests had higher pH, greater organic matter standing stock, higher abundance of aquatic moss, and the highest macroinvertebrate diversity, compared to streams running through recently clear-cut and old forests. This indicates that catchment-scale forest management can modify in-stream habitat conditions with effects on stream macroinvertebrate communities and that characteristics of younger forests may promote conditions that benefit headwater biodiversity.
RI Jonsson, Micael/E-6839-2012; Laudon, Hjalmar/J-3074-2013
OI Laudon, Hjalmar/0000-0001-6058-1466; Burrows, Ryan/0000-0002-3296-1864
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 0044-7447
EI 1654-7209
PD APR
PY 2017
VL 46
IS 3
BP 311
EP 323
DI 10.1007/s13280-016-0837-y
SC Engineering; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000397818800005
PM 27804095
ER

PT J
AU Chakraborty, S
   Nielsen, LT
   Andersen, KH
AF Chakraborty, Subhendu
   Nielsen, Lasse Tor
   Andersen, Ken H.
TI Trophic Strategies of Unicellular Plankton
SO AMERICAN NATURALIST
DT Article
DE plankton size; mixotrophy; trait-based model; seasonal succession
ID COST-BENEFIT-ANALYSIS; NUTRIENT-UPTAKE; CELL-SIZE; PHYTOPLANKTON GROWTH;
   MIXOTROPHIC PLANKTON; WATER COLUMN; TRADE-OFFS; FOOD WEBS; TRAITS;
   ORGANISMS
AB Unicellular plankton employ trophic strategies ranging from pure photoautotrophs over mixotrophy to obligate heterotrophs (phagotrophs), with cell sizes from 10(-8) to 1 g C. A full understanding of how trophic strategy and cell size depend on resource environment and predation is lacking. To this end, we develop and calibrate a trait-based model for unicellular planktonic organisms characterized by four traits: cell size and investments in phototrophy, nutrient uptake, and phagotrophy. We use the model to predict how optimal trophic strategies depend on cell size under various environmental conditions, including seasonal succession. We identify two mixotrophic strategies: generalist mixotrophs investing in all three investment traits and obligate mixotrophs investing only in phototrophy and phagotrophy. We formulate two conjectures: (1) most cells are limited by organic carbon; however, small unicellulars are colimited by organic carbon and nutrients, and only large photoautotrophs and smaller mixotrophs are nutrient limited; (2) trophic strategy is bottom-up selected by the environment, while optimal size is top-down selected by predation. The focus on cell size and trophic strategies facilitates general insights into the strategies of a broad class of organisms in the size range from micrometers to millimeters that dominate the primary and secondary production of the world's oceans.
OI Andersen, Ken Haste/0000-0002-8478-3430; Nielsen, Lasse
   Tor/0000-0003-4177-3205
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 0003-0147
EI 1537-5323
PD APR
PY 2017
VL 189
IS 4
BP E77
EP E90
DI 10.1086/690764
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000398685600002
PM 28350501
ER

PT J
AU Yohe, LR
   Abubakar, R
   Giordano, C
   Dumont, E
   Sears, KE
   Rossiter, SJ
   Davalos, LM
AF Yohe, Laurel R.
   Abubakar, Ramatu
   Giordano, Christina
   Dumont, Elizabeth
   Sears, Karen E.
   Rossiter, Stephen J.
   Davalos, Liliana M.
TI Trpc2 pseudogenization dynamics in bats reveal ancestral vomeronasal
   signaling, then pervasive loss
SO EVOLUTION
DT Article
DE Pheromone; purifying selection; relaxed selection; Trpc2; vomeronasal
   system
ID ACCESSORY OLFACTORY-BULB; MEXICAN BLIND CAVEFISH; DOLLOS LAW;
   MAXIMUM-LIKELIHOOD; RE-EVOLUTION; MOLECULAR EVOLUTION; EYE DEGENERATION;
   ELEPHAS-MAXIMUS; MARINE MAMMALS; PRIMATES
AB Comparative methods are often used to infer loss or gain of complex phenotypes, but few studies take advantage of genes tightly linked with complex traits to test for shifts in the strength of selection. In mammals, vomerolfaction detects chemical cues mediating many social and reproductive behaviors and is highly conserved, but all bats exhibit degraded vomeronasal structures with the exception of two families (Phyllostomidae and Miniopteridae). These families either regained vomerolfaction after ancestral loss, or there were many independent losses after diversification from an ancestor with functional vomerolfaction. In this study, we use the Transient receptor potential cation channel 2 (Trpc2) as a molecular marker for testing the evolutionary mechanisms of loss and gain of the mammalian vomeronasal system. We sequenced Trpc2 exon 2 in over 100 bat species across 17 of 20 chiropteran families. Most families showed independent pseudogenizing mutations in Trpc2, but the reading frame was highly conserved in phyllostomids and miniopterids. Phylogeny-based simulations suggest loss of function occurred after bat families diverged, and purifying selection in two families has persisted since bats shared a common ancestor. As most bats still display pheromone-mediated behavior, they might detect pheromones through the main olfactory system without using the Trpc2 signaling mechanism.
OI Davalos, Liliana/0000-0002-4327-7697
TC 6
Z9 6
SN 0014-3820
EI 1558-5646
PD APR
PY 2017
VL 71
IS 4
BP 923
EP 935
DI 10.1111/evo.13187
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Evolutionary Biology; Genetics &
   Heredity
UT WOS:000398545200009
PM 28128447
ER

PT J
AU Janes, H
   Kotta, J
   Parnoja, M
   Crowe, TP
   Rindi, F
   Orav-Kotta, H
AF Janes, Holger
   Kotta, Jonne
   Parnoja, Merli
   Crowe, Tasman P.
   Rindi, Fabio
   Orav-Kotta, Helen
TI Functional traits of marine macrophytes predict primary production
SO FUNCTIONAL ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE algae; benthic communities; biological traits; community ecology;
   community production; ecosystem ecology; ecosystem functioning;
   functional characteristics
ID ECOSYSTEM-BASED MANAGEMENT; KELP MACROCYSTIS-PYRIFERA; BOOSTED
   REGRESSION TREES; BIOLOGICAL TRAITS; SPECIES TRAITS; DIVERSITY;
   COMMUNITY; BIODIVERSITY; SERVICES; TERRESTRIAL
AB 1. The relationship between community structure and the functioning of ecosystems is the subject of ongoing debate. Biological or functional trait-based approaches that capture life strategy, morphology and behavioural characteristics have received far less attention than taxonomic diversity in this context, despite their more intuitive link to ecosystem functioning.
   2. Macrophyte primary production underpins aquatic food webs, regulates benthic and pelagic ecosystems and is a key aspect of the global carbon cycle. This study spans a range of aquatic biomes across Europe and aims to examine potential for predicting primary production of macrophyte communities based on the functional traits of species and identify the traits that are the most informative indicators of macrophyte production.
   3. Macrophyte primary production was assessed based on the oxygen production of the whole community, linked to biomasses of selected biological traits derived of its component species and analysed using the novel boosted regression trees modelling technique.
   4. Results showed that functional traits derived from macrophyte community data explained most of the variation in primary production of macrophyte communities without the need to incorporate environmental data on the habitats. Macrophyte primary production was influenced by a combination of tolerance, morphology and life habit traits; however tolerance traits contributed most of variability in macrophyte primary production when all traits were analysed jointly.
   5. This study also showed the existence of trait clustering as the studied trait categories were not fully independent; strong interlinkages between and within trait categories emerged.
   6. Our study suggests that functional trait analysis captures different aspects of ecosystem functioning and thereby enables assessing primary production of macrophyte communities over geographically distinct areas without extensive taxonomic and environmental data. This could result in a novel framework through which a simplification of the general procedure of production estimations and comparisons across environmental gradients can be achieved.
OI Kotta, Jonne/0000-0002-4970-6755
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 0269-8463
EI 1365-2435
PD APR
PY 2017
VL 31
IS 4
BP 975
EP 986
DI 10.1111/1365-2435.12798
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000398543900019
ER

PT J
AU Chupp, AD
   Battaglia, LL
AF Chupp, Adam D.
   Battaglia, Loretta L.
TI Sprouting capacity of Persea borbonia and maritime forest community
   response to simulated laurel wilt disease
SO PLANT ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE Biological invasion; Forest insect pests and disease; Persistence; Plant
   community dynamics; Vegetative reproduction
ID SOUTHEASTERN UNITED-STATES; KEY FUNCTIONAL TRAIT; BIOMASS ALLOCATION;
   PLANT-COMMUNITIES; TREE SEEDLINGS; REDBAY TREES; WOODY-PLANTS;
   PERSISTENCE; RESOURCES; TOLERANCE
AB There are numerous examples of how exotic insect pests and pathogens have altered the dominance of native tree species. Changes to the structure of associated communities will depend on whether the affected species survives and if so, the degree to which it is diminished. In the southeastern USA, Persea borbonia, a common tree found in many coastal plain habitats, is the primary host of laurel wilt disease (LWD); infection rates and main-stem mortality are catastrophically high (> 90%) in invaded populations. We simulated the effects of LWD prior to its arrival in coastal Mississippi by girdling and then removing the main stems of P. borbonia trees. Over a 2-year period, we monitored P. borbonia persistence via basal resprouts, understory light availability, and community structure. Removal of P. borbonia main stems resulted in a 50% increase in light transmission (measured at 1 m above ground level). All treated individuals produced basal resprouts, the size and number of which were positively related to initial tree girth. Post-treatment increases in basal area were greatest for the sub-canopy species, Ilex vomitoria, and were significantly higher in treatment versus control plots. Woody seedlings and herbaceous plants showed no significant trends in composition and abundance over time or between control and treatment plots. Our results suggest that removal of P. borbonia and subsequent resprouting causes shifts in P. borbonia size class frequencies and sub-canopy species dominance but has negligible impacts on understory plant community dynamics.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 1385-0237
EI 1573-5052
PD APR
PY 2017
VL 218
IS 4
BP 447
EP 457
DI 10.1007/s11258-017-0702-5
SC Plant Sciences; Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Forestry
UT WOS:000398164200007
ER

PT J
AU Pomati, F
   Jokela, J
   Castiglioni, S
   Thomas, MK
   Nizzetto, L
AF Pomati, Francesco
   Jokela, Jukka
   Castiglioni, Sara
   Thomas, Mridul K.
   Nizzetto, Luca
TI Water-borne pharmaceuticals reduce phenotypic diversity and response
   capacity of natural phytoplankton communities
SO PLOS ONE
DT Article
ID TANDEM MASS-SPECTROMETRY; PERSONAL CARE PRODUCTS; WIDELY USED BIOCIDE;
   LIQUID-CHROMATOGRAPHY; MULTICLASS DETERMINATION; ORGANIC CONTAMINANTS;
   FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; AQUATIC ENVIRONMENT; FIELD-MEASUREMENTS;
   THERAPEUTIC DRUGS
AB Chemical micropollutants occur worldwide in the environment at low concentrations and in complex mixtures, and how they affect the ecology of natural systems is still uncertain. Dynamics of natural communities are driven by the interaction between individual organisms and their growth environment, which is mediated by the organisms' expressed phenotypic traits. We tested whether exposure to a mixture of 12 pharmaceuticals and personal care products (PPCP) influences phenotypic trait diversity in lake phytoplankton communities and their ability to regulate biomass production to fit environmental changes (response capacity). We exposed natural phytoplankton assemblages to three mixture levels in permeable microcosms maintained at three depths in a eutrophic lake for one week, during which the environmental conditions were fluctuating. We studied individual-level traits, phenotypic diversity and community biomass. PPCP reduced individual-level trait variance and overall community phenotypic diversity, but maintained higher standing phytoplankton biomass compared to untreated controls. Estimated effect sizes of PPCP on traits and community properties were very large (partial Eta-squared > 0.15). The PPCP mixture antagonistically interacted with the natural environmental gradient in habitats offered by different depths and, at concentrations comparable to those in waste-water effluents, prevented communities from converging to the same phenotypic structure and total biomass of unexposed controls. We show that micropollutants can alter individual-level trait diversity of lake phytoplankton communities and therefore their capacity to respond to natural environmental gradients, potentially affecting aquatic ecosystem processes.
OI Thomas, Mridul/0000-0002-5089-5610
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 1932-6203
PD MAR 22
PY 2017
VL 12
IS 3
AR e0174207
DI 10.1371/journal.pone.0174207
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000399094700069
PM 28328933
ER

PT J
AU Sousa, FDR
   Elmoor-Loureiro, LMA
   Panarelli, EA
AF Sousa, Francisco Diogo R.
   Elmoor-Loureiro, Lourdes M. A.
   Panarelli, Eliana A.
TI The amazing diversity of the genus Monospilus Sars, 1862 (Crustacea:
   Branchiopoda: Aloninae) in South America
SO ZOOTAXA
DT Article
DE adaptation; litter; morphological radiation; semiterrestrial habitats;
   Monospilus dispar; Monospilus daedalus
ID COMPARATIVE FUNCTIONAL MORPHOLOGY; ADAPTIVE RADIATION; CLADOCERA
   CRUSTACEA; CHYDORIDAE CRUSTACEA; FRESH-WATER; ANOMOPODA; CERRADO;
   REGION; BRAZIL; REDESCRIPTION
AB The main goal of this paper is to describe three new species of the genus Monospilus Sars, 1862 (Crustacea: Cladocera). Monospilus macroerosus sp. nov. differs from other species of the genus in several peculiar morphological traits, the most striking being the presence of a saw-shaped pecten of teeth on the postabdominal claw. This species inhabits semiterrestrial habitats (wet leaf litter on hydromorphic soil from gallery forest), exhibiting adaptations related to movement and food handling in this type of habitat. Monospilus brachyspinus sp. nov. inhabits truly aquatic habitats, where lives being associated with macrophytes and submerged leaves. It may be recognized by the postabdominal claw, which is armed with proximal spinulae modified in a short spine. In Monospilus sp., the proximal spinulae are modified in a long and slender spine. So far, Monospilus sp. occurs in southern South America, while Monospilus macroerosus sp. nov. and Monospilus brachyspinus sp. nov. occur in the Cerrado biome in Brazil, in the central portion of South America. Some conclusions about the conservation status of new species also are made.
OI Elmoor-Loureiro, Lourdes/0000-0001-7439-9753
TC 3
Z9 4
SN 1175-5326
EI 1175-5334
PD MAR 13
PY 2017
VL 4242
IS 3
BP 467
EP 492
DI 10.11646/zootaxa.4242.3.3
SC Zoology
UT WOS:000395914200003
PM 28610161
ER

PT J
AU van der Linden, P
   Marchini, A
   Smith, CJ
   Dolbeth, M
   Simone, LRL
   Marques, JC
   Molozzi, J
   Medeiros, CR
   Patricio, J
AF van der Linden, Pieter
   Marchini, Agnese
   Smith, Christopher J.
   Dolbeth, Marina
   Simone, Luiz Ricardo L.
   Marques, Joao Carlos
   Molozzi, Joseline
   Medeiros, Carlinda Railly
   Patricio, Joana
TI Functional changes in polychaete and mollusc communities in two tropical
   estuaries
SO ESTUARINE COASTAL AND SHELF SCIENCE
DT Article
DE Estuarine invertebrates; Disturbance and environmental gradients;
   Biological traits; Trait-based approach; Functional diversity; Tropical
   estuaries
ID BENTHIC COMMUNITIES; BIOLOGICAL TRAITS; MULTIPLE TRAITS; DIVERSITY;
   ASSEMBLAGES; ECOSYSTEM; FRAMEWORK; NEREIDIDAE; HABITATS; PATTERNS
AB Currently, there is limited knowledge on how benthic communities function in relation to changing environmental conditions in tropical estuaries. This study contributes to filling this knowledge gap by analysing structural and functional community patterns within two tropical estuaries in the northeast of Brazil. Replicate macrofaunal samples were taken in different environmental zones along the estuary, together with physico-chemical measurements. The faunal analysis focussed on the trait analysis of polychaete and mollusc communities as both of these groups have an important role in regulating the functioning of aquatic systems. The separate analyses of polychaetes and molluscs allowed evaluating the way in which each group responded to the environmental gradients. The results demonstrate that community functioning for the polychaetes depended greatly on the spatial environmental gradients within these systems-, with generally higher functional diversity in the lower zones suggesting increased diversity in resource use strategies, whereas the upper zones showed very little functional diversity due to the prevalence of environmental filtering. In the case of the molluscs, their functioning remained more similar along the estuarine gradient, with low taxonomic and functional diversity throughout the estuaries. In general, polychaetes displayed higher levels of taxonomic and functional diversity, suggesting that compared to the molluscs, they potentially utilised the available resources more efficiently, which may enhance the processes and overall functioning of these systems. We advocate that more studies are needed to obtain a generalised pattern of estuarine function within and across biogeographical regions. (C) 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
RI Marchini, Agnese/J-9256-2012; Museu de Zoologia da USP,
   MZ-USP/Q-2192-2016; Dolbeth, Marina/I-3840-2013; CESAM, UA/M-3762-2015
OI Marchini, Agnese/0000-0003-4580-0522; Dolbeth,
   Marina/0000-0002-8775-0351; MARQUES, JOAO CARLOS/0000-0001-8865-8189
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 0272-7714
EI 1096-0015
PD MAR 5
PY 2017
VL 187
BP 62
EP 73
DI 10.1016/j.ecss.2016.12.019
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000399624100008
ER

PT J
AU Gavelis, GS
   Wakeman, KC
   Tillmann, U
   Ripken, C
   Mitarai, S
   Herranz, M
   Ozbek, S
   Holstein, T
   Keeling, PJ
   Leander, BS
AF Gavelis, Gregory S.
   Wakeman, Kevin C.
   Tillmann, Urban
   Ripken, Christina
   Mitarai, Satoshi
   Herranz, Maria
   Oezbek, Suat
   Holstein, Thomas
   Keeling, Patrick J.
   Leander, Brian S.
TI Microbial arms race: Ballistic "nematocysts" in dinoflagellates
   represent a new extreme in organelle complexity
SO SCIENCE ADVANCES
DT Article
ID WESTERN KOREA MORPHOLOGY; SHIWHAENSE N. GEN.; HETEROTROPHIC
   DINOFLAGELLATE; POLYKRIKOS-KOFOIDII; GYMNODINIUM-CATENATUM; CNIDARIAN
   NEMATOCYST; TAENIOCYST COMPLEX; COASTAL WATERS; FINE-STRUCTURE; MIXED
   MODELS
AB We examine the origin of harpoon-like secretory organelles (nematocysts) in dinoflagellate protists. These ballistic organelles have been hypothesized to be homologous to similarly complex structures in animals (cnidarians); but we show, using structural, functional, and phylogenomic data, that nematocysts evolved independently in both lineages. We also recorded the first high-resolution videos of nematocyst discharge in dinoflagellates. Unexpectedly, our data suggest that different types of dinoflagellate nematocysts use two fundamentally different types of ballistic mechanisms: one type relies on a single pressurized capsule for propulsion, whereas the other type launches 11 to 15 projectiles from an arrangement similar to a Gatling gun. Despite their radical structural differences, these nematocysts share a single origin within dinoflagellates and both potentially use a contraction-based mechanism to generate ballistic force. The diversity of traits in dinoflagellate nematocysts demonstrates a stepwise route by which simple secretory structures diversified to yield elaborate subcellular weaponry.
RI Mitarai, Satoshi/G-8560-2015
OI Mitarai, Satoshi/0000-0003-3033-2332
TC 4
Z9 4
SN 2375-2548
PD MAR
PY 2017
VL 3
IS 3
AR e1602552
DI 10.1126/sciadv.1602552
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000416722700014
PM 28435864
ER

PT J
AU Thouvenot, L
   Haury, J
   Pottier, G
   Thiebaut, G
AF Thouvenot, Lise
   Haury, Jacques
   Pottier, Gaetan
   Thiebaut, Gabrielle
TI Reciprocal indirect facilitation between an an invasive macrophyte and
   an invasive crayfish
SO AQUATIC BOTANY
DT Article
DE Abundance; Colonization; Crayfish; Fragmentation; Functional traits;
   Herbivory; Macrophytes
ID FRESH-WATER MACROPHYTES; PROCAMBARUS-CLARKII; PLANT; HERBIVORY; WETLAND;
   COLONIZATION; WATERMILFOIL; CAMBARIDAE; COMMUNITY; HABITATS
AB Exotic invasive species are one of the major threats for aquatic ecosystems. However, the interactions between exotic plants and exotic herbivores have been little studied, despite their role in invasion success. Here, we tested how interactions between an invasive plant and an invasive herbivore could affect their own growth and their colonization abilities in freshwater ecosystems. Ludwigia grandiflora and Procambarus clarkii, two exotic invasive species which co-occur in some French wetlands, were used for our laboratory experiment and field survey. Although L grandiflora was consumed by crayfish, its growth was not significantly affected by crayfish density. Indeed, the final living biomass of L. grandiflora was similar to those of controls, despite significant losses induced by crayfish. Furthermore, L. grandiflora became more fragmented in the presence of a high density of P. clarkii, which might increase its dispersal abilities. In addition, our field survey revealed that the abundance of crayfish was higher in a patch invaded by L. grandiflora than in an uninvaded patch. Thus, the outcome of the interaction between the invasive plant and the invasive crayfish, via its positive effect on the invasion dynamics of these two species, could have dramatic consequences for native communities of freshwater ecosystems. (C) 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0304-3770
EI 1879-1522
PD MAR
PY 2017
VL 139
BP 1
EP 7
DI 10.1016/j.aquabot.2017.02.002
SC Plant Sciences; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000400715900001
ER

PT J
AU Brandenburg, KM
   Domis, LND
   Wohlrab, S
   Krock, B
   John, U
   van Scheppingen, Y
   van Donk, E
   Van de Waal, DB
AF Brandenburg, Karen M.
   Domis, Lisette N. de Senerpont
   Wohlrab, Sylke
   Krock, Bernd
   John, Uwe
   van Scheppingen, Yvonne
   van Donk, Ellen
   Van de Waal, Dedmer B.
TI Combined physical, chemical and biological factors shape Alexandrium
   ostenfeldii blooms in the Netherlands
SO HARMFUL ALGAE
DT Article
DE Alexandrium; Nutrients; Grazing; Wind speed; Temperature; Salinity
ID HARMFUL ALGAL BLOOMS; NORTHERN BALTIC SEA; PSP-TOXIN CONTENT; MARINE
   DINOFLAGELLATE; PERUVIANUM BALECH; MENDIOLA BALECH; THAU LAGOON;
   PHYTOPLANKTON COMMUNITIES; SHELLFISH TOXINS; SOUTHERN FRANCE
AB Harmful algal blooms (HABs) are globally expanding, compromising water quality worldwide. HAB dynamics are determined by a complex interplay of abiotic and biotic factors, and their emergence has often been linked to eutrophication, and more recently to climate change. The dinoflagellate Alexandrium is one of the most widespread HAB genera and its success is based on key functional traits like allelopathy, mixotrophy, cyst formation and nutrient retrieval migrations. Since 2012, dense Alexandrium ostenfeldii blooms (up to 4500 cells mL(-1)) have recurred annually in a creek located in the southwest of the Netherlands, an area characterized by intense agriculture and aquaculture. We investigated how physical, chemical and biological factors influenced A. ostenfeldii bloom dynamics over three consecutive years (2013-2015). Overall, we found a decrease in the magnitude of the bloom over the years that could largely be linked to changing weather conditions during summer. More specifically, low salinities due to excessive rainfall and increased wind speed corresponded to a delayed A. ostenfeldii bloom with reduced population densities in 2015. Within each year, highest population densities generally corresponded to high temperatures, low DIN:DIP ratios and low grazer densities. Together, our results demonstrate an important role of nutrient availability, absence of grazing, and particularly of the physical environment on the magnitude and duration of A. ostenfeldii blooms. Our results suggest that predicted changes in the physical environment may enhance bloom development in future coastal waters and embayments. (C) 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
RI Library, Library/A-4320-2012; van Donk, Ellen/B-7272-2008; Van de Waal,
   Dedmer/B-8002-2012; De Senerpont Domis, Lisette/C-2902-2008
OI Library, Library/0000-0002-3835-159X; van Donk,
   Ellen/0000-0003-3279-4936; Van de Waal, Dedmer/0000-0001-8803-1247; De
   Senerpont Domis, Lisette/0000-0001-7509-9541; Wohlrab,
   Sylke/0000-0003-3190-0880; Brandenburg, Karen/0000-0002-9342-3349
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 1568-9883
EI 1878-1470
PD MAR
PY 2017
VL 63
BP 146
EP 153
DI 10.1016/j.hal.2017.02.004
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000399849100015
PM 28366389
ER

PT J
AU Escobedo, VM
   Rios, RS
   Salgado-Luarte, C
   Stotz, GC
   Gianoli, E
AF Escobedo, Victor M.
   Rios, Rodrigo S.
   Salgado-Luarte, Cristian
   Stotz, Gisela C.
   Gianoli, Ernesto
TI Disturbance by an endemic rodent in an arid shrubland is a habitat
   filter: effects on plant invasion and taxonomical, functional and
   phylogenetic community structure
SO ANNALS OF BOTANY
DT Article
DE Disturbance gradient; habitat filtering; phylogenetic signal; short life
   cycle; exotic species; functional divergence; phylogenetic structure;
   Spalacopus cyanus
ID TRAITS WORLDWIDE; COASTAL CHILE; DIVERSITY; PATTERNS; ECOLOGY;
   VEGETATION; METAANALYSIS; HYPOTHESIS; PRODUCTIVITY; BIODIVERSITY
AB Background and Aims Disturbance often drives plant invasion and may modify community assembly. However, little is known about how these modifications of community patterns occur in terms of taxonomic, functional and phylogenetic structure. This study evaluated in an arid shrubland the influence of disturbance by an endemic rodent on community functional divergence and phylogenetic structure as well as on plant invasion. It was expected that disturbance would operate as a habitat filter favouring exotic species with short life cycles.
   Methods Sixteen plots were sampled along a disturbance gradient caused by the endemic fossorial rodent Spalacopus cyanus, measuring community parameters and estimating functional divergence for life history traits (functional dispersion index) and the relative contribution to functional divergence of exotic and native species. The phylogenetic signal (Pagel's lambda) and phylogenetic community structure (mean phylogenetic distance and mean nearest taxon phylogenetic distance) were also estimated. The use of a continuous approach to the disturbance gradient allowed the identification of non-linear relationships between disturbance and community parameters.
   Key Results The relationship between disturbance and both species richness and abundance was positive for exotic species and negative for native species. Disturbance modified community composition, and exotic species were associated with more disturbed sites. Disturbance increased trait convergence, which resulted in phylogenetic clustering because traits showed a significant phylogenetic signal. The relative contribution of exotic species to functional divergence increased, while that of natives decreased, with disturbance. Exotic and native species were not phylogenetically distinct.
   Conclusions Disturbance by rodents in this arid shrubland constitutes a habitat filter over phylogeny-dependent life history traits, leading to phylogenetic clustering, and drives invasion by favouring species with short life cycles. Results can be explained by high phenotypic and phylogenetic resemblance between exotic and native species. The use of continuous gradients when studying the effects of disturbance on community assembly is advocated.
RI Stotz, Gisela/E-2197-2017
OI Stotz, Gisela/0000-0001-8687-7361; Gianoli, Ernesto/0000-0003-4246-8640
TC 2
Z9 3
SN 0305-7364
EI 1095-8290
PD MAR
PY 2017
VL 119
IS 4
BP 659
EP 670
DI 10.1093/aob/mcw258
SC Plant Sciences
UT WOS:000398452400017
PM 28087661
ER

PT J
AU Han, ZF
   Xiao, SJ
   Liu, XD
   Liu, Y
   Li, JK
   Xie, YJ
   Wang, ZY
AF Han Zhaofang
   Xiao Shijun
   Liu Xiande
   Liu Yang
   Li Jiakai
   Xie Yangjie
   Wang Zhiyong
TI De novo characterization of Larimichthys crocea transcriptome for
   growth-/immune-related gene identification and massive microsatellite
   (SSR) marker development
SO CHINESE JOURNAL OF OCEANOLOGY AND LIMNOLOGY
DT Article
DE Larimichthys crocea; transcriptome; functional genes; SSR markers
ID LARGE YELLOW CROAKER; PSEUDOSCIAENA-CROCEA; RAPID DEVELOPMENT; TOOL;
   TECHNOLOGIES; ANNOTATION; FISH
AB The large yellow croaker, Larimichthys crocea is an important marine fish in China with a high economic value. In the last decade, the stock conservation and aquaculture industry of this species have been facing severe challenges because of wild population collapse and degeneration of important economic traits. However, genes contributing to growth and immunity in L. crocea have not been thoroughly analyzed, and available molecular markers are still not sufficient for genetic resource management and molecular selection. In this work, we sequenced the transcriptome in L. crocea liver tissue with a Roche 454 sequencing platform and assembled the transcriptome into 93 801 transcripts. Of them, 38 856 transcripts were successfully annotated in nt, nr, Swiss-Prot, InterPro, COG, GO and KEGG databases. Based on the annotation information, 3 165 unigenes related to growth and immunity were identified. Additionally, a total of 6 391 simple sequence repeats (SSRs) were identified from the transcriptome, among which 4 498 SSRs had enough flanking regions to design primers for polymerase chain reactions (PCR). To access the polymorphism of these markers, 30 primer pairs were randomly selected for PCR amplification and validation in 30 individuals, and 12 primer pairs (40.0%) exhibited obvious length polymorphisms. This work applied RNA-Seq to assemble and analyze a live transcriptome in L. crocea. With gene annotation and sequence information, genes related to growth and immunity were identified and massive SSR markers were developed, providing valuable genetic resources for future gene functional analysis and selective breeding of L. crocea
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0254-4059
EI 1993-5005
PD MAR
PY 2017
VL 35
IS 2
BP 225
EP 234
DI 10.1007/s00343-016-5288-6
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000396021400001
ER

PT J
AU Elferink, S
   Neuhaus, S
   Wohlrab, S
   Toebe, K
   Voss, D
   Gottschling, M
   Lundholm, N
   Krock, B
   Koch, BP
   Zielinski, O
   Cembella, A
   John, U
AF Elferink, Stephanie
   Neuhaus, Stefan
   Wohlrab, Sylke
   Toebe, Kerstin
   Voss, Daniela
   Gottschling, Marc
   Lundholm, Nina
   Krock, Bernd
   Koch, Boris P.
   Zielinski, Oliver
   Cembella, Allan
   John, Uwe
TI Molecular diversity patterns among various phytoplankton size-fractions
   in West Greenland in late summer
SO DEEP-SEA RESEARCH PART I-OCEANOGRAPHIC RESEARCH PAPERS
DT Article
DE 454 Pyrosequencing; Aquatic communities; Arctic; Biodiversity;
   DNA-barcoding; Phytoplankton community; Pelagic environment
ID RIBOSOMAL-RNA GENE; HETEROTROPHIC DINOFLAGELLATE GENUS; TAMARENSE
   SPECIES COMPLEX; DISKO BAY; ALEXANDRIUM-TAMARENSE; COMMUNITY STRUCTURE;
   MARINE ECOSYSTEMS; MICROBIAL DIVERSITY; PROTIST DIVERSITY; GLOBAL
   DIVERSITY
AB Arctic regions have experienced pronounced biological and biophysical transformations as a result of global change processes over the last several decades. Current hypotheses propose an elevated impact of those environmental changes on the biodiversity, community composition and metabolic processes of species. The effects on ecosystem function and services, particularly when invasive or toxigenic harmful species become dominant, can be expressed over a wide range of temporal and spatial scales in plankton communities. Our study focused on the comparison of molecular biodiversity of three size-fractions (micro-, nano-, picoplankton) in the coastal pelagic zone of West Greenland and their association with environmental parameters. Molecular diversity was assessed via parallel amplicon sequencing the 28S rRNA hypervariable D1/D2 region. We showed that biodiversity distribution within the area of Uummannaq Fjord, Vaigat Strait and Disko Bay differed markedly within and among size-fractions. In general, we observed a higher diversity within the picoplankton size fraction compared to the nano- and microplankton. In multidimensional scaling analysis, community composition of all three size fractions correlated with cell size, silicate and phosphate, chlorophyll alpha (chl alpha) and dinophysistoxin (DTX). Individually, each size fraction community composition also correlated with other different environmental parameters, i.e. temperature and nitrate. We observed a more homogeneous community of the picoplankton across all stations compared to the larger size classes, despite different prevailing environmental conditions of the sampling areas. This suggests that habitat niche occupation for larger-celled species may lead to higher functional trait plasticity expressed as an enhanced range of phenotypes, whereas smaller organisms may compensate for lower potential plasticity with higher diversity. The presence of recently identified toxigenic harmful algal bloom (HAB) species (such as Alexandrium fundyense and A. ostenfeldiz) in the area points out the potential risk for this vulnerable ecosystem in a changing world.
RI Zielinski, Oliver/Q-2502-2018; Gottschling, Marc/K-2186-2014; Koch,
   Boris/B-2784-2009
OI Zielinski, Oliver/0000-0002-6018-5030; Koch, Boris/0000-0002-8453-731X;
   Wohlrab, Sylke/0000-0003-3190-0880; Lundholm, Nina/0000-0002-2035-1997
TC 3
Z9 3
SN 0967-0637
EI 1879-0119
PD MAR
PY 2017
VL 121
BP 54
EP 69
DI 10.1016/j.dsr.2016.11.002
SC Oceanography
UT WOS:000397693600005
ER

PT J
AU Almeida, M
   Frutos, I
   Tecchio, S
   Lampadariou, N
   Company, JB
   Ramirez-Llodra, E
   Cunha, MR
AF Almeida, Mariana
   Frutos, Inmaculada
   Tecchio, Samele
   Lampadariou, Nikolaos
   Company, Joan B.
   Ramirez-Llodra, Eva
   Cunha, Marina R.
TI Biodiversity patterns of crustacean suprabenthic assemblages along an
   oligotrophic gradient in the bathyal Mediterranean Sea
SO DEEP-SEA RESEARCH PART I-OCEANOGRAPHIC RESEARCH PAPERS
DT Article
DE Deep-sea suprabenthos; Mediterranean; Biodiversity; Oligotrophy;
   Vertical distribution; Community structure
ID NEAR-BOTTOM DISTRIBUTION; BENTHIC BOUNDARY-LAYER; SOUTH AEGEAN SEA;
   SPECIES-DIVERSITY; CATALAN SEA; COMMUNITY STRUCTURE; PRIMARY
   PRODUCTIVITY; CONTINENTAL-MARGIN; CANYON BAY; DEEP
AB Crustacean suprabenthic abundance, community structure, a-diversity (both taxonomic and trophic) and 13 diversity were studied along a West-East gradient of oligotrophy in the deep Mediterranean Sea. The assemblages were sampled with a suprabenthic sledge in three regions (western, central and eastern basins) at three water depths (1200, 2000 and 3000 m) in May-June2009. Environmental data were obtained at each sampling location including sediment properties, oceanographic variables near the seafloor and in the water column, and proxies of epipelagic productivity at the surface. Our results, concerning the crustacean component of the suprabenthos, showed complex trends in community structure and biodiversity across different spatial scales (longitudinal, bathymetric, and near-bottom distribution). A decrease in the number of species and abundance, accompanied by changes in the trophic structure of the assemblages were observed from West to East. In the eastern region the assemblages were impoverished in number of trophic guilds and trophic diversity. The West-East oligotrophic gradient was identified as the main driver in community structure as shown by the significant correlation with trophic environmental variables. Differences in community structure across regions were more marked at greater depths, while at the shallower sites assemblages were more similar. Within each basin, abundance, number of species and number of trophic groups decreased with depth, showing high turnover rates between 1200 and 2000 m depths. The small-scale (0-150 cm) vertical distribution of the suprabenthos was interpreted in relation to the species' functional traits (e.g. swimming activity, migratory behaviour, bottom dependence, feeding habits). Bottom-dependent and more mobile components of the suprabenthos were apparently responding differently to the various environmental challenges imposed by the large-scale longitudinal and bathymetric gradients. We propose that the bathyal suprabenthos in the Mediterranean Sea may be essentially modulated by environmental sorting, but while the more mobile faunal component has more efficient dispersal mechanisms, the bottom-dependent component may be affected by limited dispersal. However, this empirical interpretation has still to be proved given the important caveats of our study (e.g. typically low densities of the Mediterranean bathyal suprabenthos; limited number of samples; difficulties in standardization inherent to suprabenthic sampling operations in the deep sea).
RI CESAM, UA/M-3762-2015; Cunha, Marina/B-7644-2008; Almeida,
   Mariana/G-5683-2018
OI Cunha, Marina/0000-0001-8833-6980; Almeida, Mariana/0000-0002-0615-2318;
   Ramirez-Llodra, Eva/0000-0003-0137-1906; Frutos,
   Inmaculada/0000-0003-0428-5261
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 0967-0637
EI 1879-0119
PD MAR
PY 2017
VL 121
BP 224
EP 236
DI 10.1016/j.dsr.2017.01.008
SC Oceanography
UT WOS:000397693600019
ER

PT J
AU Pruitt, JN
   Howell, KA
   Gladney, SJ
   Yang, YS
   Lichtenstein, JLL
   Spicer, ME
   Echeverri, SA
   Pinter-Wollman, N
AF Pruitt, Jonathan N.
   Howell, Kimberly A.
   Gladney, Shaniqua J.
   Yang, Yusan
   Lichtenstein, James L. L.
   Spicer, Michelle Elise
   Echeverri, Sebastian A.
   Pinter-Wollman, Noa
TI Behavioral Hypervolumes of Predator Groups and Predator-Predator
   Interactions Shape Prey Survival Rates and Selection on Prey Behavior
SO AMERICAN NATURALIST
DT Article
DE behavioral hypervolume; behavioral syndrome; keystone species; marine
   ecology; personality; temperament
ID GRASSLAND ECOSYSTEM FUNCTION; ECOLOGICAL CONSEQUENCES; ANTIPREDATOR
   RESPONSE; FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; TEGULA-FUNEBRALIS; GENETIC DIVERSITY;
   NATURAL-SELECTION; SOCIAL INSECTS; NATIONAL-PARK; HUNTING MODE
AB Predator-prey interactions often vary on the basis of the traits of the individual predators and prey involved. Here we examine whether the multidimensional behavioral diversity of predator groups shapes prey mortality rates and selection on prey behavior. We ran individual sea stars (Pisaster ochraceus) through three behavioral assays to characterize individuals' behavioral phenotype along three axes. We then created groups that varied in the volume of behavioral space that they occupied. We further manipulated the ability of predators to interact with one another physically via the addition of barriers. Prey snails (Chlorostome funebralis) were also run through an assay to evaluate their predator avoidance behavior before their use in mesocosm experiments. We then subjected pools of prey to predator groups and recorded the number of prey consumed and their behavioral phenotypes. We found that predator-predator interactions changed survival selection on prey traits: when predators were prevented from interacting, more fearful snails had higher survival rates, whereas prey fearfulness had no effect on survival when predators were free to interact. We also found that groups of predators that occupied a larger volume in behavioral trait space consumed 35% more prey snails than homogeneous predator groups. Finally, we found that behavioral hypervolumes were better predictors of prey survival rates than single behavioral traits or other multivariate statistics (i.e., principal component analysis). Taken together, predator-predator interactions and multidimensional behavioral diversity determine prey survival rates and selection on prey traits in this system.
OI Echeverri, Sebastian/0000-0002-6978-0688; Yang,
   Yusan/0000-0003-2765-4197
TC 8
Z9 8
SN 0003-0147
EI 1537-5323
PD MAR
PY 2017
VL 189
IS 3
BP 254
EP 266
DI 10.1086/690292
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000395447700007
PM 28221831
ER

PT J
AU Valdivia, N
   Segovia-Rivera, V
   Fica, E
   Bonta, CC
   Aguilera, MA
   Broitman, BR
AF Valdivia, Nelson
   Segovia-Rivera, Viviana
   Fica, Eliseo
   Bonta, Cesar C.
   Aguilera, Moises A.
   Broitman, Bernardo R.
TI Context-dependent functional dispersion across similar ranges of trait
   space covered by intertidal rocky shore communities
SO ECOLOGY AND EVOLUTION
DT Article
DE community assembly; desiccation; environmental filtering; functional
   beta-diversity; functional traits; marine; mesoscale; seasonal
ID LARVAL DEVELOPMENT; CENTRAL CHILE; LABORATORY CONDITIONS; DIVERSITY
   INDEXES; SOUTHERN CHILE; ASSEMBLY RULES; WAVE-EXPOSURE; RECRUITMENT;
   COEXISTENCE; FRAMEWORK
AB Functional diversity is intimately linked with community assembly processes, but its large-scale patterns of variation are often not well understood. Here, we investigated the spatiotemporal changes in multiple trait dimensions (trait space) along vertical intertidal environmental stress gradients and across a landscape scale. We predicted that the range of the trait space covered by local assemblages (i.e., functional richness) and the dispersion in trait abundances (i.e., functional dispersion) should increase from high- to low-intertidal elevations, due to the decreasing influence of environmental filtering. The abundance of macrobenthic algae and invertebrates was estimated at four rocky shores spanning ca. 200km of the coast over a 36-month period. Functional richness and dispersion were contrasted against matrix-swap models to remove any confounding effect of species richness on functional diversity. Random-slope models showed that functional richness and dispersion significantly increased from high- to low-intertidal heights, demonstrating that under harsh environmental conditions, the assemblages comprised similar abundances of functionally similar species (i.e., trait convergence), while that under milder conditions, the assemblages encompassed differing abundances of functionally dissimilar species (i.e., trait divergence). According to the Akaike information criteria, the relationship between local environmental stress and functional richness was persistent across sites and sampling times, while functional dispersion varied significantly. Environmental filtering therefore has persistent effects on the range of trait space covered by these assemblages, but context-dependent effects on the abundances of trait combinations within such range. Our results further suggest that natural and/or anthropogenic factors might have significant effects on the relative abundance of functional traits, despite that no trait addition or extinction is detected.
OI Broitman, Bernardo/0000-0001-6582-3188; Valdivia,
   Nelson/0000-0002-5394-2072
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 2045-7758
PD MAR
PY 2017
VL 7
IS 6
BP 1882
EP 1891
DI 10.1002/ece3.2762
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000397458000019
PM 28331595
ER

PT J
AU Jiang, GF
   Goodale, UM
   Liu, YY
   Hao, GY
   Cao, KF
AF Jiang, Guo-Feng
   Goodale, Uromi Manage
   Liu, Yan-Yan
   Hao, Guang-You
   Cao, Kun-Fang
TI Salt management strategy defines the stem and leaf hydraulic
   characteristics of six mangrove tree species
SO TREE PHYSIOLOGY
DT Article
DE cavitation resistance; hydraulic efficiency; hydraulic safety; salt
   adaptation; salt exclusion; salt secretion
ID XYLEM CAVITATION; GAS-EXCHANGE; LAGUNCULARIA-RACEMOSA;
   RHIZOPHORA-MANGLE; AVICENNIA-MARINA; WATER POTENTIALS; GROWTH-RESPONSES;
   SEEDLING GROWTH; PREDAWN PLANT; CARBON GAIN
AB Mangroves in hypersaline coastal habitats are under constant high xylem tension and face great risk of hydraulic dysfunction. To investigate the relationships between functional traits and salt management, we measured 20 hydraulic and photosynthetic traits in four salt-adapted (SA) and two non-SA (NSA) mangrove tree species in south China. The SA species included two salt secretors (SSs), Avicennia marina (Forsskal) Vierhapper and Aegiceras corniculatum (L.) Blanco and two salt excluders (SEs), Bruguiera gymnorrhiza (L.) Savigny and Kandelia obovata (L.) Sheue et al. The two NSA species were Hibiscus tiliaceus (L.) and Pongamia pinnata (L.) Merr. Extremely high xylem cavitation resistance, indicated by water potential at 50% loss of xylem conductivity (Psi(50); -7.85 MPa), was found in SEs. Lower cavitation resistance was observed in SSs, and may result from incomplete salt removal that reduces the magnitude of xylem tension required to maintain water uptake from the soil. Surprisingly, the NSA species, P. pinnata, had very low Psi(50) (-5.44 MPa). Compared with NSAs, SAs had lower photosynthesis, vessel density, hydraulic conductivity and vessel diameter, but higher sapwood density. Eight traits were strongly associated with species' salt management strategies, with predawn water potential (Psi(PD)) and mean vessel diameter accounting for 95% flow (D-95) having the most significant association; D-95 separated SAs from NSAs and SEs had the lowest Psi(PD). There was significant coupling between hydraulic traits and carbon assimilation traits. Instead of hydraulic safety being compromised by xylem efficiency, mangrove species with higher safety had higher efficiency and greater sapwood density (rho(Sapwood)), but there was no relationship between rho(Sapwood) and efficiency. Principal component analysis differentiated the species of the three salt management strategies by loading D, D-95 and vessel density on the first axis and loading Psi(PD), Psi(50) and water potential at 12% loss of xylem conductivity (Psi(12)), rho(Sapwood) and quantum yield on the second axis. Our results provide the first comparative characterization of hydraulic and photosynthetic traits among mangroves with different salt management strategies.
RI Yang, Da/L-6267-2013; Cao, Kun-Fang/D-2157-2009
OI Yang, Da/0000-0001-7306-3289; Cao, Kun-Fang/0000-0002-2253-7189
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0829-318X
EI 1758-4469
PD MAR
PY 2017
VL 37
IS 3
BP 389
EP 401
DI 10.1093/treephys/tpw131
SC Forestry
UT WOS:000398060300010
PM 28100712
ER

PT J
AU Agir, SU
   Kutbay, HG
   Surmen, B
   Elmas, E
AF Agir, Senay Ulu
   Kutbay, Hamdi Guray
   Surmen, Burak
   Elmas, Emire
TI The effects of erosion and accretion on plant communities in coastal
   dunes in north of Turkey
SO RENDICONTI LINCEI-SCIENZE FISICHE E NATURALI
DT Article
DE Central Black Sea region; Coastal dynamics; Similarity percentage;
   Zonation
ID FUNCTIONAL TRAITS; SAND DUNES; VEGETATION; SEA; DISTURBANCE;
   CLASSIFICATION; CONSERVATION; RESTORATION; SYSTEMS
AB Coastal erosion resulted in dramatic changes in the structure of coastal dune communities for example many characteristic species may be removed from dune zones. The effects of coastal erosion on coastal dune communities in north of Turkey were investigated along seashore-inland gradient. It has been found that the severity of erosion caused to increase the differences among coastal dune communities. Our results also implied that embryonic shifting dunes represented by Achilleo maritimo-Elymetum farcti (EU Habitat 2110) and shifting dunes along the shoreline with Ammophila arenaria (white dunes) represented by Medicagini marinae-Ammophiletum arundinacea (EU Habitat 2120) were more prone to coastal dynamics. It has been found that the severity of erosion caused to increase the differences among coastal dune communities.
TC 1
Z9 2
SN 2037-4631
EI 1720-0776
PD MAR
PY 2017
VL 28
IS 1
BP 203
EP 224
DI 10.1007/s12210-017-0599-x
SC Science & Technology - Other Topics
UT WOS:000394371100018
ER

PT J
AU Richardson, LE
   Graham, NAJ
   Pratchett, MS
   Hoey, AS
AF Richardson, Laura E.
   Graham, Nicholas A. J.
   Pratchett, Morgan S.
   Hoey, Andrew S.
TI Structural complexity mediates functional structure of reef fish
   assemblages among coral habitats
SO ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY OF FISHES
DT Article
DE Coral composition; Fish assemblage structure; Functional diversity;
   Traits; Environmental filtering
ID GREAT-BARRIER-REEF; PHASE-SHIFTS; CARDINALFISHES APOGONIDAE; RESOURCE
   LIMITATION; OCEAN ACIDIFICATION; COMMUNITY STRUCTURE; ALTERNATIVE
   STATES; ECOSYSTEM FUNCTION; DIVERSITY; CLIMATE
AB Coral community composition varies considerably due to both environmental conditions and disturbance histories. However, the extent to which coral composition influences associated fish assemblages remains largely unknown. Here an ecological trait-based ordination analysis was used to compare functional richness (range of unique trait combinations), functional evenness (weighted distribution of fishes with shared traits), and functional divergence (proportion of total abundance supported by species with traits on the periphery of functional space) of fish assemblages among six distinct coral habitats. Despite no significant variation in species richness among habitats, there were differences in the functional richness and functional divergence, but not functional evenness, of fish assemblages among habitats. Structural complexity of coral assemblages was the best predictor of the differences in functional richness and divergence among habitats. Functional richness of fish assemblages was highest in branching Porites habitats, lowest in Pocillopora and soft coral habitats, and intermediate in massive Porites, staghorn Acropora, and mixed coral habitats. Massive and branching Porites habitats displayed greater functional divergence in fish assemblages than the Pocillopora habitat, whilst the remaining habitats were intermediate. Differences in functional richness and divergence were largely driven by the presence of small schooling planktivores in the massive and branching Porites habitats. These results indicate that differential structural complexity among coral communities may act as an environmental filter, affecting the distribution and abundance of associated species traits, particularly those of small-bodied schooling fishes.
RI Graham, Nicholas/C-8360-2014
OI Graham, Nicholas/0000-0002-0304-7467
TC 6
Z9 6
SN 0378-1909
EI 1573-5133
PD MAR
PY 2017
VL 100
IS 3
BP 193
EP 207
DI 10.1007/s10641-016-0571-0
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000394357500001
ER

PT J
AU Klais, R
   Norros, V
   Lehtinen, S
   Tamminen, T
   Olli, K
AF Klais, Riina
   Norros, Veera
   Lehtinen, Sirpa
   Tamminen, Timo
   Olli, Kalle
TI Community assembly and drivers of phytoplankton functional structure
SO FUNCTIONAL ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE coastal waters; community assembly; functional traits; phytoplankton;
   species pool
ID WATER GREEN-ALGAE; BALTIC SEA; SPECIES INTERACTIONS; CELL-SIZE;
   FOOD-WEB; DIVERSITY; FACILITATION; PATTERNS; INCREASE; BLOOMS
AB We analysed the functional composition of coastal phytoplankton communities (n=7941) along the gradient from marine to brackish waters of the Baltic Sea, using species-specific morphological and ecological functional traits (ability to fix atmospheric nitrogen, mixotrophy, use of silica in cell walls, formation of chains or colonies, motility, accessory pigment composition, and size), to describe and measure the functional differences between species. Mean pairwise functional distance of phytoplankton communities increased from spring to mid- and late summer in all regions, due to higher pigment diversity, increased share of mixotrophic and nitrogen-fixing species, more diverse size distribution and reduced dominance of silica users. A null model that simulated the expected community composition from empirical spatial distribution and environmental preferences of individual taxa was used to partition the effects of habitat filtering and biotic interactions on the community assembly. About every fourth community departed significantly from random expectations, signalling the notable effect of biotic interactions in the assembly of natural phytoplankton communities.
OI Klais, Riina/0000-0003-2895-1273
TC 6
Z9 6
SN 0269-8463
EI 1365-2435
PD MAR
PY 2017
VL 31
IS 3
BP 760
EP 767
DI 10.1111/1365-2435.12784
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000395347300021
ER

PT J
AU Wrede, A
   Dannheim, J
   Gutow, L
   Brey, T
AF Wrede, Alexa
   Dannheim, Jennifer
   Gutow, Lars
   Brey, Thomas
TI Who really matters: Influence of German Bight key bioturbators on
   biogeochemical cycling and sediment turnover
SO JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL MARINE BIOLOGY AND ECOLOGY
DT Article
DE Bioturbation potential; Sediment reworking; Bioirrigation; Amphiura
   filiformis; Echinocardium cordatum; Nucula nitidosa
ID BRITTLESTAR AMPHIURA-FILIFORMIS; COASTAL MARINE-SEDIMENTS; SOUTHERN
   NORTH-SEA; ARM REGENERATION; ORGANIC-MATTER; IN-SITU; ECOSYSTEM
   FUNCTION; PROFILE IMAGERY; OXYGEN FLUX; WEST-COAST
AB Loss of bioturbating key species from marine sediments has been shown to strongly reduce benthic biogeochemical cycling and ecosystem functioning. It is thus of paramount importance to identify key bioturbators and quantify their effect on biogeochemical processes. To do so trait based community and species bioturbation potential (BPc and BPi) was mapped for 423 North Sea stations in the German Bight. Mapping of BPc and BPi identified Amphiura filiformis, Echinocardium cordatum and Nucula nitidosa as major bioturbating species in the German Bight. The effects of these species on benthic nutrient flux (i.e., changing concentrations of silicate Delta[SiO2], ammonium Delta[NH4+], nitrate Delta[NO3- and nitrite Delta[NO2-]) were quantified in laboratory experiments together with their bioturbation rate (D-b) and bioirrigation activity. The experiments indicated that mapped species bioturbation potential (BPi) may be a poor tool for identifying key bioturbators while calculated experimental BPi ((PBPi)-P-exp) was a good indicator for species impact on biogeochemical cycling. Out of the three investigated species only E. cordatum significantly influenced biogeochemical cycling, whereas the effect of A. filiformis remained inconclusive potentially because arm damage and regeneration may affect the bioturbation activity of many individuals. The bivalve N. nitidosa showed only little impact on biogeochemical cycling, although this species was found to be an active bioturbator. Accordingly, E. cordatum may be considered one of the most important contributors to biogeochemical cycling at the sediment-water interface in the German Bight. (C) 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
OI Gutow, Lars/0000-0002-9017-0083; Dannheim, Jennifer/0000-0002-3737-5872;
   Brey, Thomas/0000-0002-6345-2851
TC 11
Z9 11
SN 0022-0981
EI 1879-1697
PD MAR
PY 2017
VL 488
BP 92
EP 101
DI 10.1016/j.jembe.2017.01.001
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000394403500011
ER

PT J
AU Alexandridis, N
   Bacher, C
   Desroy, N
   Jean, F
AF Alexandridis, Nikolaos
   Bacher, Cedric
   Desroy, Nicolas
   Jean, Fred
TI Building functional groups of marine benthic macroinvertebrates on the
   basis of general community assembly mechanisms
SO JOURNAL OF SEA RESEARCH
DT Article
DE Assembly mechanisms; Benthic communities; Biological traits; Emergent
   groups; Functional diversity; Functional redundancy
ID RAOS QUADRATIC ENTROPY; BODY-SIZE; FOOD WEBS; NORTH-SEA; BIOLOGICAL
   TRAITS; ECOLOGICAL DATA; DIVERSITY; BIODIVERSITY; CONSERVATION;
   COMPETITION
AB The accurate reproduction of the spatial and temporal dynamics of marine benthic biodiversity requires the development of mechanistic models, based on the processes that shape macroinvertebrate communities. The modelled entities should, accordingly, be able to adequately represent the many functional roles that are performed by benthic organisms. With this goal in mind, we applied the emergent group hypothesis (EGH), which assumes functional equivalence Within and functional divergence between groups of species. The first step of the grouping involved the selection of 14 biological traits that describe the role of benthic macroinverte-brates in 7 important community assembly mechanisms. A matrix of trait values for the 240 species that occurred in the Rance estuary (Brittany, France) in 1995 formed the basis for a hierarchical classification that generated 20 functional groups, each with its own trait values. The functional groups were first evaluated based on their ability to represent observed patterns of biodiversity. The two main assumptions of the EGH were then tested, by assessing the preservation of niche attributes among the groups and the neutrality of functional differences within them. The generally positive results give us confidence in the ability of the grouping to recreate functional diversity in the Rance estuary. A first look at the emergent groups provides insights into the potential role of community assembly mechanisms in shaping biodiversity patterns. Our next steps include the derivation of general rules of interaction and their incorporation, along with the functional groups, into mechanistic models of benthic biodiversity. (C) 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
RI Jean, Fred/A-8226-2010
OI Jean, Fred/0000-0002-1132-230X; Bacher, Cedric/0000-0001-6090-4667
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 1385-1101
EI 1873-1414
PD MAR
PY 2017
VL 121
BP 59
EP 70
DI 10.1016/j.seares.2017.01.007
SC Marine & Freshwater Biology; Oceanography
UT WOS:000394485000006
ER

PT J
AU Ducey, MJ
   Woodall, CW
   Bravo-Oviedo, A
AF Ducey, Mark J.
   Woodall, Christopher W.
   Bravo-Oviedo, Andres
TI Climate and species functional traits influence maximum live tree
   stocking in the Lake States, USA
SO FOREST ECOLOGY AND MANAGEMENT
DT Article
DE Competition; Stand density management; Relative density; Stocking;
   Functional traits; Climate change
ID STAND-DENSITY INDEX; THINNING BOUNDARY LINE; COASTAL BRITISH-COLUMBIA;
   WOOD SPECIFIC-GRAVITY; DOUGLAS-FIR; SHADE TOLERANCE; WESTERN HEMLOCK;
   UNITED-STATES; MIXED STANDS; QUANTILE REGRESSION
AB Quantifying the density of live trees in forest stands and partitioning it between species or other stand components is critical for predicting forest dynamics and responses to management, as well as understanding the impacts of stand composition and structure on productivity. As plant traits such as shade tolerance have been proven to refine understanding of plant community dynamics, we extended a previous model relating maximum stand density to wood specific gravity to incorporate shade tolerance as an additional functional trait. Additionally, we included climatic variables that might influence ecological dynamics and modulate species-specific traits, across a region and also potentially over time under climate change scenarios. We used data from the USDA Forest Service, Forest Inventory and Analysis program for three states in the northern United States (Minnesota, Wisconsin, and Michigan) that reflect strong gradients in climate and species composition, to fit a maximum density model by quantile regression. The resulting strictly additive density measure conforms well to both existing silvicultural guidance and to observed densities of monocultures that lack such guidance. Wood specific gravity appears to interact with precipitation, while shade tolerance interacts with temperature, in driving maximum density relationships. Our proposed maximum stand density model is not only parsimonious for field application in management situations, but also empowers the evaluation of the effects of future climate and tree range scenarios on forest management guidelines. (C) 2016 Published by Elsevier B.V.
RI Bravo-Oviedo, Andres/D-1512-2009
OI Bravo-Oviedo, Andres/0000-0001-7036-7041; Ducey,
   Mark/0000-0002-2027-1188
TC 10
Z9 10
SN 0378-1127
EI 1872-7042
PD FEB 15
PY 2017
VL 386
BP 51
EP 61
DI 10.1016/j,foreco.2016.12.007
SC Forestry
UT WOS:000392781300005
ER

PT J
AU Brun, P
   Payne, MR
   Kiorboe, T
AF Brun, Philipp
   Payne, Mark R.
   Kiorboe, Thomas
TI A trait database for marine copepods
SO EARTH SYSTEM SCIENCE DATA
DT Article; Data Paper
ID BIOGEOGRAPHY
AB The trait-based approach is gaining increasing popularity in marine plankton ecology but the field urgently needs more and easier accessible trait data to advance. We compiled trait information on marine pelagic copepods, a major group of zooplankton, from the published literature and from experts and organized the data into a structured database. We collected 9306 records for 14 functional traits. Particular attention was given to body size, feeding mode, egg size, spawning strategy, respiration rate, and myelination (presence of nerve sheathing). Most records were reported at the species level, but some phylogenetically conserved traits, such as myelination, were reported at higher taxonomic levels, allowing the entire diversity of around 10 800 recognized marine copepod species to be covered with a few records. Aside from myelination, data coverage was highest for spawning strategy and body size, while information was more limited for quantitative traits related to reproduction and physiology. The database may be used to investigate relationships between traits, to produce trait biogeographies, or to inform and validate trait-based marine ecosystem models. The data can be downloaded from PANGAEA, doi:10.1594/PANGAEA.862968.
RI Payne, Mark/C-6844-2008
OI Payne, Mark/0000-0001-5795-2481; Brun, Philipp/0000-0002-2750-9793
TC 7
Z9 7
SN 1866-3508
EI 1866-3516
PD FEB 14
PY 2017
VL 9
IS 1
BP 99
EP 113
DI 10.5194/essd-9-99-2017
SC Geology; Meteorology & Atmospheric Sciences
UT WOS:000395133800002
ER

PT J
AU Rudolf, VHW
   Van Allen, BG
AF Rudolf, Volker H. W.
   Van Allen, B. G.
TI Legacy effects of developmental stages determine the functional role of
   predators
SO NATURE ECOLOGY & EVOLUTION
DT Article
ID STRUCTURED POPULATIONS; SPECIES INTERACTIONS; ECOLOGICAL NETWORKS;
   BIODIVERSITY LOSS; SIZE; COMPETITION; SALAMANDERS; DYNAMICS; DIVERSITY;
   CONSEQUENCES
AB Predators are instrumental in structuring natural communities and ecosystem processes. The strong effects of predators are often attributed to their high trophic position in the food web. However, most predators have to grow and move up the food chain before reaching their final trophic position, and during this developmental process their traits, interactions and abundances change. Here, we show that this process of 'moving up' the food chain during development strongly determines the ecological role of a predator. By experimentally manipulating the succession of developmental stages of a predatory salamander in a seasonal aquatic ecosystem, we found that the effects of this apex predator on the ecosystem typically declined with age and size. Furthermore, younger, smaller predator stages had long-lasting effects on community structure and ecosystem function that determined the effects of subsequent older, larger stages. Consequently, the legacy effects of early stages largely shaped the impact of the predator on the ecosystem, which could not simply be inferred from its final trophic position. Our results highlight that accounting for all life stages when managing natural populations is crucial to preserve the functioning of natural ecosystems, especially given that early life stages of species are often particularly vulnerable to natural and anthropogenic disturbances.
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 2397-334X
PD FEB
PY 2017
VL 1
IS 2
AR UNSP 0038
DI 10.1038/s41559-016-0038
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000417169600013
PM 28812616
ER

PT J
AU Bhanu, CV
   Rao, MS
   Annapurna, C
   Ambedkar, A
AF Bhanu, Ch. Vijaya
   Rao, M. Srinivasa
   Annapurna, C.
   Ambedkar, A.
TI Functional diversity of nematode communities in the Nizampatnam Bay, Bay
   of Bengal
SO INDIAN JOURNAL OF GEO-MARINE SCIENCES
DT Article
DE Nematodes; meiobenthos; tropical environment; marine ecology; species
   diversity
ID MATURITY INDEX; NORTH-SEA; BIODIVERSITY; FAUNA
AB During the present study the relationship between taxonomic and biological trait approaches in relation to the abiotic environment were studied from the nematode samples collected from 64 subtidal stations during the four seasons in the Nizampatnam Bay, East coast of India. 19 categories of five biological traits known to represent an important ecological function were employed. These were related to buccal morphology, tail shape, body size, body shape and life history strategy. Data on trait membership was provided by biological information on species and genera. A total of 34 different trait combinations were recorded. In the present study, the most common morphotypes were non-selective deposit feeding nematodes, with colonizing abilities of 2-4 (in a scale of 15). Their abundance was correlated with depth. Inspite of a high turnover of species, functional diversity of assemblages did not change notably in space and time. A comparison of spatial and temporal patterns of nematode functional diversity between Nizampatnam Bay and other semi enclosed Bays in temperate and tropical regions suggests that two features are common: (1) in detecting spatial patterns, taxonomic approach is more powerful tool than biological trait approach; (2) biological trait approach offers more reliable correlative links with environmental factors than taxonomic one.
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0379-5136
EI 0975-1033
PD FEB
PY 2017
VL 46
IS 2
BP 322
EP 337
SC Oceanography
UT WOS:000407093900014
ER

PT J
AU Verissimo, H
   Verdelhos, T
   Baeta, A
   van der Linden, P
   Garcia, AC
   Marques, JC
AF Verissimo, Helena
   Verdelhos, Tiago
   Baeta, Alexandra
   van der Linden, Pieter
   Garcia, Ana Carla
   Marques, Joao Carlos
TI Comparison of thermodynamic-oriented indicators and trait-based indices
   ability to track environmental changes: Response of benthic
   macroinvertebrates to management in a temperate estuary
SO ECOLOGICAL INDICATORS
DT Article
DE Ecological indicators; Management; Environmental disturbance; Estuaries
ID FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY INDEXES; QUALITY ASSESSMENT; MACROBENTHIC
   COMMUNITIES; MARINE BIODIVERSITY; ECOLOGICAL INDEXES; BIOLOGICAL TRAITS;
   SPECIES TRAITS; ECOSYSTEM; EXERGY; COASTAL
AB Reliable ecosystem status assessment of coastal and marine environments is key due to mounting pressures from human activities. Aiming at a successful management, a plethora of evaluation tools currently exist, but there is no consensus on what index or indices should be used by environmental managers in establishing benthic quality.
   The main goal of this investigation was to evaluate the suitability of thermodynamic-oriented indicators (Eco-Exergy and Specific Eco-Exergy) and trait-based indices (Rao's Quadratic Entropy, Functional Redundancy and Community-Weighted Mean trait value) as tools to capture potential ecological changes, comprehending their utility for addressing specific management objectives. In order to do so, a long-term data set (1993-2012) from a southern European estuary (Mondego estuary, Portugal) was used to assess the responsiveness of macroinvertebrates assemblages to a large-scale management intervention, and the performance of thermodynamic-oriented indicators and trait-based indices was compared.
   The results indicated that the undertaken management efforts were successful at improving the ecosystem state and confirmed that hydrodynamic conditions in the estuary have been the major drivers of the changes observed over the last three decades. Both Exergy-based and trait-based indices coherently reflected the ecological changes observed along the temporal disturbance-recovery gradient analysed. Indices response was congruent but of different nature and detail level. Trait-based indices provided a more detailed assessment of the benthic communities and informative picture than Exergy-based indices but the overall outcome of both types of indices was broadly convergent. Combining multiple indicators should thus be more likely to improve transparency and to provide a more robust assessment method. (C) 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
RI Baeta, Alexandra/Q-6704-2018
OI Baeta, Alexandra/0000-0001-9898-9096; Verissimo,
   Helena/0000-0003-3971-8696; Verdelhos, Tiago/0000-0003-4713-3006;
   MARQUES, JOAO CARLOS/0000-0001-8865-8189
TC 8
Z9 8
SN 1470-160X
EI 1872-7034
PD FEB
PY 2017
VL 73
BP 809
EP 824
DI 10.1016/j.ecolind.2016.10.040
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000398334400080
ER

PT J
AU Correa, FF
   Pereira, MP
   Madail, RH
   Santos, BR
   Barbosa, S
   Castro, EM
   Pereira, FJ
AF Correa, F. F.
   Pereira, M. P.
   Madail, R. H.
   Santos, B. R.
   Barbosa, S.
   Castro, E. M.
   Pereira, F. J.
TI Anatomical traits related to stress in high density populations of Typha
   angustifolia L. (Typhaceae)
SO BRAZILIAN JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE anatomical plasticity; cattail; macrophytes; plant handling;
   eutrophication; stress
ID LEAF ANATOMY; PASPALUM-DILATATUM; SARACURA MAIZE; WATER; TOLERANCE;
   GROWTH; PERMEABILITY; MACROPHYTES; ENRICHMENT; HERBIVORY
AB Some macrophytes species show a high growth potential, colonizing large areas on aquatic environments. Cattail (Typha angustifolia L.) uncontrolled growth causes several problems to human activities and local biodiversity, but this also may lead to competition and further problems for this species itself. Thus, the objective of this study was to investigate anatomical modifications on T. angustifolia plants from different population densities, once it can help to understand its biology. Roots and leaves were collected from natural populations growing under high and low densities. These plant materials were fixed and submitted to usual plant microtechnique procedures. Slides were observed and photographed under light microscopy and images were analyzed in the UTHSCSA-Imagetool software. The experimental design was completely randomized with two treatments and ten replicates, data were submitted to one-way ANOVA and Scott-Knott test at p<0.05. Leaves from low density populations showed higher stomatal density and index. These modifications on stomatal characteristics were more evident on the leaf abaxial surface. Plants from low density populations showed thicker mesophyll and higher proportion of aerenchymal area. Roots from low density populations showed a higher proportion of the vascular cylinder. Whereas, plants from higher density populations showed greater thickness of the endodermis, exodermis, phloem and root cortex. Higher density populations showed a higher proportion of aerenchymal gaps in the root cortex. Therefore, cattail plants from populations growing under high density population show anatomical traits typical of plants under stress, which promotes the development of less functional anatomical modifications to aquatic environments.
RI Pereira, Fabricio/N-1192-2015
OI Pereira, Fabricio/0000-0002-8132-0625
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 1519-6984
EI 1678-4375
PD FEB
PY 2017
VL 77
IS 1
BP 52
EP 59
DI 10.1590/1519-6984.09715
SC Life Sciences & Biomedicine - Other Topics
UT WOS:000397873600008
PM 27382995
ER

PT J
AU Lukacs, BA
   Vojtko, AE
   Mesterhazy, A
   Molnar, VA
   Suveges, K
   Vegvari, Z
   Brusa, G
   Cerabolini, BEL
AF Lukacs, Balazs A.
   Vojtko, Anna E.
   Mesterhazy, Attila
   Molnar, Attila, V
   Suveges, Kristof
   Vegvari, Zsolt
   Brusa, Guido
   Cerabolini, Bruno E. L.
TI Growth-form and spatiality driving the functional difference of native
   and alien aquatic plants in Europe
SO ECOLOGY AND EVOLUTION
DT Article
DE functional trait; invasion ecology; LDMC; macrophyte; neophyte; SLA
ID LEAF TRAIT RELATIONSHIPS; PHYLOGENETICALLY INDEPENDENT CONTRASTS;
   DRY-MATTER CONTENT; ECONOMICS SPECTRUM; INVASIVE PLANTS; MACROPHYTE
   COMMUNITIES; PHENOTYPIC PLASTICITY; RELATIVE IMPORTANCE; LOCAL
   ENVIRONMENT; WATER DEPTH
AB Trait-based approaches are widely used in community ecology and invasion biology to unravel underlying mechanisms of vegetation dynamics. Although fundamental trade-offs between specific traits and invasibility are well described among terrestrial plants, little is known about their role and function in aquatic plant species. In this study, we examine the functional differences of aquatic alien and native plants stating that alien and native species differ in selected leaf traits. Our investigation is based on 60 taxa ( 21 alien and 39 native) collected from 22 freshwater units of Hungarian and Italian lowlands and highlands. Linear mixed models were used to investigate the effects of nativeness on four fundamental traits ( leaf area, leaf dry matter content, specific leaf area, and leaf nitrogen content), while the influence of growth-form, altitude, and site were employed simultaneously. We found significantly higher values of leaf areas and significantly lower values of specific leaf areas for alien species if growth-form was included in the model as an additional predictor. We showed that the trait-based approach of autochthony can apply to aquatic environments similar to terrestrial ones, and leaf traits have relevance in explaining aquatic plant ecology whether traits are combined with growth-forms as a fixed factor. Our results confirm the importance of traits related to competitive ability in the process of aquatic plant invasions. Alien aquatic plants can be characterized as species producing soft leaves faster. We argue that the functional traits of alien aquatic plants are strongly growth-form dependent. Using the trait-based approach, we found reliable characteristics of aquatic plants related to species invasions, which might be used, for example, in conservation management.
OI Cerabolini, Bruno Enrico Leone/0000-0002-3793-0733
TC 2
Z9 2
SN 2045-7758
PD FEB
PY 2017
VL 7
IS 3
BP 950
EP 963
DI 10.1002/ece3.2703
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Evolutionary Biology
UT WOS:000394504100016
PM 28168031
ER

PT J
AU Fontanillas, E
   Galzitskaya, OV
   Lecompte, O
   Lobanov, MY
   Tanguy, A
   Mary, J
   Girguis, PR
   Hourdez, S
   Jollivet, D
AF Fontanillas, Eric
   Galzitskaya, Oxana V.
   Lecompte, Odile
   Lobanov, Mikhail Y.
   Tanguy, Arnaud
   Mary, Jean
   Girguis, Peter R.
   Hourdez, Stephane
   Jollivet, Didier
TI Proteome Evolution of Deep-Sea Hydrothermal Vent Alvinellid Polychaetes
   Supports the Ancestry of Thermophily and Subsequent Adaptation to Cold
   in Some Lineages
SO GENOME BIOLOGY AND EVOLUTION
DT Article
DE hydrothermal vents; thermal adaptation; RNAseq; protein composition;
   selection
ID EUKARYOTIC THERMOSTABILITY; PARALVINELLA-GRASSLEI; REPRODUCTIVE-BIOLOGY;
   MAXIMUM-LIKELIHOOD; THERMAL-STABILITY; HIGH-TEMPERATURE; NEUTRAL THEORY;
   WORM; PROTEINS; PACIFIC
AB Temperature, perhaps more than any other environmental factor, is likely to influence the evolution of all organisms. It is also a very interesting factor to understand how genomes are shaped by selection over evolutionary timescales, as it potentially affects the whole genome. Among thermophilic prokaryotes, temperature affects both codon usage and protein composition to increase the stability of the transcriptional/translational machinery, and the resulting proteins need to be functional at high temperatures. Among eukaryotes less is known about genome evolution, and the tube-dwelling worms of the family Alvinellidae represent an excellent opportunity to test hypotheses about the emergence of thermophily in ectothermic metazoans. The Alvinellidae are a group of worms that experience varying thermal regimes, presumably having evolved into these niches over evolutionary times. Here we analyzed 423 putative orthologous loci derived from 6 alvinellid species including the thermophilic Alvinella pompejana and Paralvinella sulfincola. This comparative approach allowed us to assess amino acid composition, codon usage, divergence, direction of residue changes and the strength of selection along the alvinellid phylogeny, and to design a new eukaryotic thermophilic criterion based on significant differences in the residue composition of proteins. Contrary to expectations, the alvinellid ancestor of all present-day species seems to have been thermophilic, a trait subsequently maintained by purifying selection in lineages that still inhabit higher temperature environments. In contrast, lineages currently living in colder habitats likely evolved under selective relaxation, with some degree of positive selection for low-temperature adaptation at the protein level.
RI MARY, Jean/H-2344-2011
OI Girguis, Peter/0000-0002-3599-8160
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 1759-6653
PD FEB
PY 2017
VL 9
IS 2
BP 279
EP 296
DI 10.1093/gbe/evw298
SC Evolutionary Biology; Genetics & Heredity
UT WOS:000396058400003
PM 28082607
ER

PT J
AU Caceres, C
   Rivera, A
   Gonzalez, S
   Anadon, R
AF Caceres, Carlos
   Rivera, Antonella
   Gonzalez, Sonia
   Anadon, Ricardo
TI Phytoplankton community structure and dynamics in the North Atlantic
   subtropical gyre
SO PROGRESS IN OCEANOGRAPHY
DT Article
DE Phytoplankton growth rate; Microzooplankton grazing rate; Phytoplankton
   community structure; Nutrient availability; Subtropical gyres; Dilution
   experiments; Mixed models
ID NUTRIENT-UPTAKE; MICROZOOPLANKTON HERBIVORY; SEASONAL DYNAMICS;
   FUNCTIONAL TRAITS; GROWTH-RATES; ALGAL GROWTH; FOOD WEBS; CELL-SIZE;
   OCEAN; TEMPERATURE
AB Phytoplankton fuel epipelagic ecosystems and affect global biogeochemical cycles. Nevertheless, there is still a lack of quantitative information about the factors that determine both phytoplankton community structure and dynamics, particularly in subtropical gyres. Here, we estimated size fractionated phytoplankton growth (is) and microzooplankton grazing rates (m) along a transect in the subtropical North Atlantic, from the island of Hispaniola to the Iberian Peninsula, by conducting dilution experiments and fitting mixed models. We also examined the relationship between nutrient availability and the differences in both phytoplankton community structure and size fractionated phytoplankton growth rates at two spatial scales (i.e. subtropical gyre and within-province spatial scale). Our results revealed high values for both phytoplankton growth and microzooplankton grazing rates. Phytoplankton growth (0.00-1.19 d-(1)) displayed higher variability among stations. biogeochemical provinces and size fractions than the microzooplankton grazing rate (0.32-0.74 d-(1)). Differences in phytoplankton community structure were associated with dissolved inorganic nitrogen (0.72-5.85 mu M; R-2 = 0.19) and squared BruntVaisall frequency (R-2 = 0.21) at the whole gyre scale. Conversely, the differences in phytoplankton growth rate showed a weak relationship with those properties (R2 <= 0.05) at that scale, but a stronger relationship at the within province scale (R-2 >= 0.07). These results support the idea that phytoplankton grow at high rates in oligotrophic subtropical gyres, this is likely due to the selection of phytoplankton groups with functional traits suited to exploit low nutrient availability. Thus, shedding new, multi scale knowledge on the commonly misunderstood "ocean deserts". (C) 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
OI Rivera, Antonella/0000-0001-8680-9115
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0079-6611
PD FEB
PY 2017
VL 151
BP 177
EP 188
DI 10.1016/j.pocean.2016.12.003
SC Oceanography
UT WOS:000395609900012
ER

PT J
AU Deary, AL
   Hilton, EJ
AF Deary, Alison L.
   Hilton, Eric J.
TI Influence of cladogenesis on feeding structures in drums (Teleostei:
   Sciaenidae)
SO ZOOLOGY
DT Article
DE Oral jaws; Feeding apparatus; Pagel's lambda; Phylogenetic dependence;
   Ecomorphology
ID CHESAPEAKE BAY; PERCIFORMES SCIAENIDAE; FUNCTIONAL-MORPHOLOGY;
   NEOTROPICAL CICHLIDS; PHYLOGENETIC SIGNAL; ESTUARINE FISHES;
   LIFE-HISTORY; NEW-WORLD; EVOLUTION; PATTERNS
AB Drums (family Sciaenidae) are common in tropical to temperate coastal and estuarine habitats worldwide and present a broad spectrum of morphological diversity. The anatomical variation in this family is particularly evident in their feeding apparatus, which may reflect the partitioning of adult foraging habitats. Adult and early life history stage sciaenids may display ecomorphological patterns in oral and pharyngeal jaw elements but because sciaenids are hierarchically related, the morphological variation of the feeding apparatus cannot be analyzed as independent data. Morphological patterns have been identified in three sciaenid genera from the Chesapeake Bay but it is not known if these patterns are present in other genera of the family and if such patterns are constrained by phylogenetic history. In this study, phylogenetic comparative methods were applied to two sets of oral jaw data obtained from growth series of 11 species of cleared and double-stained Chesapeake Bay sciaenids and alcohol-preserved museum specimens representing 65 of the 66 recognized genera to determine the magnitude of phylogenetic dependence present in the structure of the oral jaws using a recent molecular phylogeny of the family. Pagel's lambda, a measure of phylogenetic signal, was low for pelagic sciaenids in premaxilla, lower jaw, and ascending process lengths, indicating influence of selective forces on the condition of these traits. Conversely, for benthic sciaenids, phylogenetic signal was high for lower jaw and ascending process lengths, indicating significant phylogenetic constraint for their condition in these taxa. Pagel's lambda was intermediate for premaxilla length in benthic sciaenids, suggesting that the length of the premaxilla is influenced by a mix of selective forces and phylogenetic constraint. Although the ecomorphological patterns identified in the oral jaws of scaienids are not entirely free of phylogenetic dependence, selective forces related to foraging are likely driving the evolution of these structures. (C) 2016 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 0944-2006
PD FEB
PY 2017
VL 120
BP 53
EP 61
DI 10.1016/j.zool.2016.08.004
SC Zoology
UT WOS:000396964700006
PM 27618706
ER

PT J
AU Almeda, R
   Greve, HV
   Kiorboe, T
AF Almeda, Rodrigo
   Greve, Hans van Someren
   Kiorboe, Thomas
TI Behavior is a major determinant of predation risk in zooplankton
SO ECOSPHERE
DT Article
DE copepods; motile behavior; predation risk; trait-based approach;
   zooplankton
ID COPEPOD ACARTIA-TONSA; MARINE PLANKTONIC COPEPODS; EARLY
   DEVELOPMENTAL-STAGES; DIEL VERTICAL MIGRATION; SMALL-SCALE TURBULENCE;
   OITHONA-DAVISAE; PELAGIC COPEPODS; PREY DETECTION; SEX-RATIOS;
   HYDROMECHANICAL SIGNALS
AB Zooplankton exhibit different small-scale motile behaviors related to feeding and mating activities. These different motile behaviors may result in different levels of predation risk, which may partially determine the structure of planktonic communities. Here, we experimentally determined predation mortality associated with (1) feeding activity (ambush feeders vs. feeding-current vs. cruising feeders) and (2) mate-finding behavior(males vs. females). The copepods Oithona nana, O. davisae (ambush feeders), Temora longicornis (feeding-current feeder), and Centropages hamatus (cruising feeder) were used as prey for different predatory copepods. Copepods with "active" feeding behaviors (feeding-current and cruising feeders) showed significantly higher mortality from predation (similar to 2-8 times) than similarly sized copepods with low motility feeding behavior (ambush feeders). Copepod males, which have a more active motile behavior than females (mate-seeking behavior), suffered a higher predation mortality than females in most of the experiments. However, the predation risk for mate-searching behavior in copepods varied depending on feeding behavior with ambush feeders consistently having the greatest difference in predation mortality between genders (similar to 4 times higher for males than for females). This gender-specific predation pressure may partially explain field observations of female-biased sex ratios in ambush feeding copepods (e.g., Oithonidae). Overall, our results demonstrate that small-scale motile behavior is a key trait in zooplankton that significantly affects predation risk and therefore is a main determinant of distribution and composition of zooplankton communities in the ocean.
RI ALMEDA, RODRIGO/R-1189-2016
OI ALMEDA, RODRIGO/0000-0002-0090-112X; van Someren Greve,
   Hans/0000-0003-2570-6168
TC 6
Z9 6
SN 2150-8925
PD FEB
PY 2017
VL 8
IS 2
AR e01668
DI 10.1002/ecs2.1668
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000397091300001
ER

PT J
AU Ramsay-Newton, C
   Drouin, A
   Hughes, AR
   Bracken, MES
AF Ramsay-Newton, Christine
   Drouin, Annick
   Hughes, A. Randall
   Bracken, Matthew E. S.
TI Species, community, and ecosystem-level responses following the invasion
   of the red alga Dasysiphonia japonica to the western North Atlantic
   Ocean
SO BIOLOGICAL INVASIONS
DT Article
DE Invasive species; Biodiversity; Ecosystem functioning; Nutrient uptake;
   Dasysiphonia japonica
ID HETEROSIPHONIA-JAPONICA; BIOLOGICAL INVASIONS; INTRODUCED SEAWEEDS;
   IMPACTS; BIODIVERSITY; CONSEQUENCES; METAANALYSIS; SUCCESS; MACROALGAE;
   CERAMIALES
AB Species invasions have been increasing in frequency worldwide, yet critical gaps remain in our understanding of how invaders affect community structure and ecosystem functioning, particularly during the initial stages of invasion. Even less is known about changes in the invader that may take place immediately following an invasion. This study examined the recent invasion of the red macroalga Dasysiphonia (formerly, Heterosiphonia) japonica to the western North Atlantic Ocean with the aim of filling in gaps in our understanding of the impacts that invasive seaweeds have at the species, community and ecosystem levels immediately following their establishment. Within 5 years of invasion, community composition had changed and biodiversity had decreased to nearly half of pre-invasion levels. In addition, the relative proportion of Dasysiphonia decreased by 35% over our four-year study from initially high levels shortly after establishment. We found evidence that functional traits of this initially aggressive invader changed over time, as it ultimately became a less aggressive, co-inhabiting member of the local algal community, particularly with respect to nutrient uptake and relative abundances, although native diversity remained low relative to pre-invasion levels. Using these realistic changes in community structure, including decreases in biodiversity, we also showed that nutrient uptake of algal assemblages changed over time, suggesting changes in the functional characteristics of invaded communities, with implications for ecosystem-level processes such as nutrient fluxes. This study provides rare empirical evidence about the successional stages occurring at the individual, community, and ecosystem levels during the first 5 years of an invasion.
TC 1
Z9 1
SN 1387-3547
EI 1573-1464
PD FEB
PY 2017
VL 19
IS 2
BP 537
EP 547
DI 10.1007/s10530-016-1323-y
SC Biodiversity & Conservation; Environmental Sciences & Ecology
UT WOS:000394152300008
ER

PT J
AU Lin, YM
   Li, J
   Bakker, JD
   Lin, H
   Chen, C
   Hong, W
   Fisher, L
   Wu, CZ
   Hong, T
   Deng, HJ
   Zhang, GS
   Du, K
AF Lin, Yongming
   Li, Jian
   Bakker, Jonathan D.
   Lin, Han
   Chen, Can
   Hong, Wei
   Fisher, Loretta
   Wu, Chengzhen
   Hong, Tao
   Deng, Haojun
   Zhang, Guangshuai
   Du, Kun
TI Wind and salt spray alter tree shape and dry mass density in Casuarina
   equisetifolia L.
SO TREES-STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION
DT Article
DE Adaptive strategies; Morphological traits; Functional traits; Wind; Salt
   spray; Coastal area; Environmental stress; Thigmomorphogenesis
ID COASTAL SANDPLAIN HEATHLANDS; MECHANICAL PERTURBATION; WATER RELATIONS;
   FOREST; PLANTS; GROWTH; THIGMOMORPHOGENESIS; ARCHITECTURE; RESPONSES;
   SUCCESSION
AB Wind, salt spray, and the proximity to the coastline significantly caused the variation of tree shape and dry mass density of Casuarina equisetifolia L. planted in coastal areas.
   Despite negative effects of exotic plants, they play an important role in the erosion control and the accumulation of wind-borne deposits in coastal areas. Identifying the adaptive strategies of exotic species and predicting their ability for stress adaption are of great interest to improve the management and regeneration of coastwise protective forests. We studied Casuarina equisetifolia L., an introduced tree planted successfully for dampening wind speed and preventing coastal soil erosion in coastal regions of southern China, 450-1400 m from the coastline in Taiwan Strait. Morphological and functional traits were measured on the windward and leeward sides of each of 48 trees of identical age and diameter. Coastal stress was measured by wind speed and salt spray. Traits were summarized using the Principal Component Analysis (PCA), and PC scores were related to coastal stress and to other environmental effects. Morphological traits were summarized as PCs describing tree shape, branch supporting capacity, and branching pattern. Coastal stress significantly influenced tree shape, but not branch supporting capacity and branching pattern. Tree shape was also affected by other environmental factors. Functional traits were summarized by PCs describing dry mass density, dry matter content, and water balance, but only dry mass density was influenced by coastal stress or other environmental factors. Our study indicated that C. equisetifolia adapts to coastal stress by altering its tree shape and dry mass density. Our results provide useful information for the selection of adequate species for the erosion control and management of coastal areas.
OI Rafay, Loretta/0000-0002-1048-2950; Bakker, Jonathan/0000-0002-8973-2771
TC 0
Z9 0
SN 0931-1890
EI 1432-2285
PD FEB
PY 2017
VL 31
IS 1
BP 15
EP 26
DI 10.1007/s00468-016-1450-1
SC Forestry
UT WOS:000394283900002
ER

PT J
AU Dezerald, O
   Leroy, C
   Corbara, B
   Dejean, A
   Talaga, S
   Cereghino, R
AF Dezerald, Olivier
   Leroy, Celine
   Corbara, Bruno
   Dejean, Alain
   Talaga, Stanislas
   Cereghino, Regis
TI Environmental drivers of invertebrate population dynamics in Neotropical
   tank bromeliads
SO FRESHWATER BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE food webs; freshwater invertebrates; growth rate; life history;
   rainforest
ID FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY; COMMUNITY COMPOSITION; ECOSYSTEM FUNCTION;
   MONSOONAL STREAMS; TROPHIC STRUCTURE; FRENCH-GUIANA; HABITAT; FOREST;
   SIZE; STRATEGIES
AB Tank bromeliads form a conspicuous, yet neglected freshwater habitat in Neotropical forests. Recent studies driven by interests in medical entomology, fundamental aspects of bromeliad ecology and experimental research on food webs have, however, prompted increasing interest in bromeliad aquatic ecosystems. As yet, there is nothing in the literature about the life histories and environmental drivers of invertebrate population dynamics in tank bromeliads. Based on fortnightly samples taken over oneyear, size frequency plots and individual dry masses allowed us to establish the life cycles and growth rates of the dominant aquatic invertebrates in a common bromeliad species of French Guiana. Linear mixed-effect models and Mantel tests were used to predict changes in density, biomass, and growth rates in relation to temperature, rainfall, humidity and detrital resources. Annual variations in invertebrate densities and biomasses could be described according to three types of distribution: unimodal, bimodal or almost constant. Despite seasonal variations, precipitation, temperature, relative humidity and detritus concentration accounted significantly for changes in density and biomass, but we found no significant responses in growth rates of most invertebrate species. Species rather displayed non-seasonal life cycles with overlapping cohorts throughout the year. There was also a trend for delayed abundance peaks among congeneric species sharing similar functional traits, suggesting temporal partitioning of available resources. Beyond novel knowledge, quantitative information on life histories is important to predict food-web dynamics under the influence of external forcing and self-organisation. Our results suggest that changes in species distribution that will affect population dynamics through biotic interactions in space and/or time could have greater effects on food webs and ecosystem functioning than changes in environmental factors per se.
RI Leroy, Celine/I-4857-2016
OI Leroy, Celine/0000-0003-4859-8040; CORBARA, Bruno/0000-0003-4232-8234;
   Cereghino, Regis/0000-0003-3981-3159
TC 10
Z9 10
SN 0046-5070
EI 1365-2427
PD FEB
PY 2017
VL 62
IS 2
BP 229
EP 242
DI 10.1111/fwb.12862
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000393793100002
ER

PT J
AU Gothe, E
   Baattrup-Pedersen, A
   Wiberg-Larsen, P
   Graeber, D
   Kristensen, EA
   Friberg, N
AF Gothe, Emma
   Baattrup-Pedersen, Annette
   Wiberg-Larsen, Peter
   Graeber, Daniel
   Kristensen, Esben A.
   Friberg, Nikolai
TI Environmental and spatial controls of taxonomic versus trait composition
   of stream biota
SO FRESHWATER BIOLOGY
DT Article
DE fishes; macroinvertebrates; macrophytes; metacommunity; stream network
ID METACOMMUNITY STRUCTURE; FUNCTIONAL COMPOSITION; DISPERSAL LIMITATION;
   AQUATIC MACROPHYTES; DENDRITIC NETWORKS; HEADWATER STREAMS;
   PLANT-COMMUNITIES; LOWLAND STREAMS; SPECIES TRAITS; RIVERS
AB The spatial organisation of biotic communities derives from factors operating at a wide range of spatial and temporal scales. Despite strong scientific evidence of prevalent spatial control of community composition in freshwater ecosystems, local environmental factors are often considered as the main drivers of community change. Furthermore, taxonomic approaches are most frequently used, and few studies have compared the relative importance of local and regional control of trait versus the taxonomic composition in stream ecosystems. Using a spatially dense data set covering all stream sizes in a lowland European region of c. 42000km(2) and three organism groups (macrophytes, macroinvertebrates and fishes), we compared the relative importance of spatial and environmental determinants of species and trait composition in the study streams, classified into headwaters (stream order 1-2) and downstream sites (stream order >2). We hypothesised that (i) there is a higher correspondence between environmental conditions and trait composition than with species composition, (ii) dispersal limitation (pure spatial structuring) is greater in headwaters than in downstream sites and (iii) dispersal limitation (pure spatial structuring) is weakest for macroinvertebrates, intermediate for macrophytes and strongest for fishes. The most consistent pattern across organisms and stream order groups was a higher correspondence between environmental variation and trait composition as well as a higher number of environmental variables significantly related to trait composition than with species composition (hypothesis 1). Spatial structuring peaked in headwater macrophyte communities and downstream fish communities (hypotheses 2 & 3) - a pattern that was amplified when separate analyses of traits describing species dispersal potential were undertaken. Our study highlights the potential of traits to capture multiple environmental changes in stream ecosystems and illustrates how organism-specific and highly context-dependent patterns in community organisation can emerge as a consequence of interactions between habitat connectivity (i.e. top versus lower parts of the stream network) and organism dispersal potential.
RI Graeber, Daniel/G-3385-2012
OI Graeber, Daniel/0000-0001-8331-9639; Baattrup-Pedersen,
   Annette/0000-0002-3118-344X
TC 12
Z9 12
SN 0046-5070
EI 1365-2427
PD FEB
PY 2017
VL 62
IS 2
BP 397
EP 413
DI 10.1111/fwb.12875
SC Environmental Sciences & Ecology; Marine & Freshwater Biology
UT WOS:000393793100014
ER

EF